Let us consider, however, the general idea which
most men have respecting what they call luck. We
shall find that what they regard as affording clear evidence
that there is such a thing as luck is in reality
the result of law. Nay, they adopt such a combination
of ideas about events which seem fortuitous that the
kind of evidence they obtain must have been obtained,
let events fall as they may.

@

Let us consider the ideas of men about luck inw
gambling, as typifying in small the ideas of nearly all
men about luck in life.

@

In the first place, gamblers recognise some men as
always lucky. I do not mean, of course, that they suppose
some men always win, but that some men never
have spells of bad luck. They are in the vein,
to use the phraseology of gamblers like Steinmetz and
others, who imagine that they have reduced their wild
and wandering notions about luck into a science.

@

Next, gamblers recognise those who start on a
gambling career with singular good luck, retaining that
luck long enough to learn to trust in it confidently, and
then losing it once for all, remaining thereafter constantly
unlucky.

@

Thirdly, gamblers regard the great bulk of their community
as men of varying luck-sometimes in the
vein sometimes not-men who, if they are to be
successful, must, according to the superstitions of the
gambling world, be most careful to watch the progress
of events. These, according to Steinmetz, the great
authority on all such questions, may
gamble or not, according as they are ready or not to
obey the dictates of gambling prudence. When they
are in the vein they should gamble steadily on; but so
soon as the maturity of the chances brings with it a
change of luck they must withdraw. If they will not
do this they are likely to join the crew of the unlucky.

@

Fourthly, there are those, according to the ideas of
gamblers, who are pursued by constant ill-luck. They
are never in the vein. If they win during the first
half of an evening, they lose more during the latter
half. But usually they lose all the time.

@

Fifthly, gamblers recognise a class who, having begun
unfortunately, have had a change of luck later, and
have become members of the lucky fraternity. This
change they usually ascribe to some action or event
which, to the less brilliant imaginations of outsiders,
would seem to have nothing whatever to do with the
gamblers luck. For instance, the luck changed when
the man married-his wife being a shrew; or because
he took to wearing white waistcoats; or because so-and-so,
who had been a sort of evil genius to the unlucky
man, had gone abroad or died; or for some equally preposterous
reason.

@

Then there are special classes of lucky or unlucky
men, or special peculiarities of luck, believed in by
individual gamblers, but not generally recognised.

@

Thus there are some who believe that they are lucky on
certain days of the week, and unlucky on certain other
days. The skilful whist-player who, under the name
Pembridge, deplores the rise of the system of signals
in whist play, believes that he is lucky for a spell of
five years, unlucky for the next five years, and so on
continually. Bulwer Lytton believed that he always
lost at whist when a certain man was at the same table,
or in the same room, or even in the same house. And
there are other cases equally absurd.

@

Now, at the outset, it is to be remarked that, if any
large number of persons set to work at any form of
gambling-card play, racing, or whatever else it may
be-their fortunes be such, let the individual
members of the company be whom they may, that they
will be divisible into such sets as are indicated above.
If the numbers are only large enough, not one of those
classes, not even the special classes mentioned at the
last, can fail to be represented.

@

Consider, for instance, the following simple illustrative
case.

@

Suppose a large number of persons-say, for instance,
twenty millions-engage in some game depending
wholly on chance, two persons taking part in each
game, so that there are ten million contests. Now, it is
obvious that, whether the chances in each contest are
exactly equal or not, exactly ten millions of the twenty
millions of persons will rise up winners and as many
will rise up losers, the game being understood to be of
such a kind that one player or the other must win. So
far, then, as the results of that first set of contests are
concerned, there will be ten million persons who will
consider themselves to be in luck.

@

Now, let the same twenty millions of persons engage
a second time in the same two-handed game, the pairs
of players being not the same as at the first encounter,
but distributed as chance may direct. Then there will
be ten millions of winners and ten millions of losers.
Again, if we consider the fortunes of the ten million
winners on the first night, we see that, since the chance
which, each one of these has of being again a winner is
equal to the chance he has of losing, one-half of
the winning ten millions of the first night will be winners
on the second night too. Nor shall we deduce a
wrong general result if, for convenience, we say 
one-half; so long as we are dealing with very large
numbers we know that this result must be near the
truth, and in chance problems of this sort we require
 no more. On this assumption, there
are at the end of the second contest five millions who
have won in both encounters, and five millions who have
won in the first and lost in the second. The other ten
millions, who lost in the first encounter, may similarly
be divided into five millions who lost also in the second,
and as many who won in the second. Thus, at the end
of the second encounter, there are five millions of
players who deem themselves lucky, as they have won
twice and not lost at all; as many who deem themselves
unlucky, having lost in both encounters; while ten
millions, or half the original number, have no reason
to regard themselves as either lucky or unlucky, having
won and lost in equal degree.

@

Extending our investigation to a third contest, we
find that, will be confirmed in their opinion
that they are very lucky, since they will have won in all
three encounters; while as many will have lost in all
three, and begin to regard themselves, and to be regarded
by their fellow-gamblers, as hopelessly unlucky.
Of the remaining fifteen millions of players, it will be
found that, will have won twice and lost once,
while as many will have lost twice and won once.
 Half of the fifteen millions will deem themselves
rather lucky, while the other half will deem
themselves rather unlucky. None, of course, can have
had even luck, since an odd number of games has been
played.

@

Our, players enter on a fourth series of
encounters. At its close there are found to be,
very lucky players, who have won in all four encounters,
and as many unlucky ones who have lost in all four.
Of the, players who had won in three encounters,
one-half lose in the fourth; they had been
deemed lucky, but now their luck has changed. So
with the, who had been thus far unlucky
one-half of them win on the fourth trial. We have
then, winners of three games out of four, and
, losers of three games out of four. Of the
, who had won two and lost one, one-half, or
,, win another game, and must be added to the
, just mentioned, making three million winners
of three games out of four. The other half lose the
fourth game, giving us, who have had equal
fortunes thus far, winning two games and losing two.
Of the other,, who had lost two and won one,
half win the fourth game, and so give, more
who have lost two games and won two thus in all we
have, who have had equal fortunes. The
others lose at the fourth trial, and give us, to
be added to the, already counted, who have
lost thrice and won once only.

@

At the close, then, of the fourth encounter, we find
a million and a quarter of players who have been constantly
lucky, and as many who have been constantly
unlucky. Five millions, having won three games out
of four, consider themselves to have better luck than
the average; while as many, having lost three games
out of four, regard themselves as unlucky. Lastly, we
have seven millions and a half who have won and lost
in equal degree. These, it will be seen, constitute the
largest part of our gambling community, though not
equal to the other classes taken together. They are, in
fact, three-eighths of the entire community.

@

So we might proceed to consider the twenty millions
of gamblers after a fifth encounter, a sixth, and so
on. Nor is there any difficulty in dealing with the
matter in that way. But a sort of account must be
kept in proceeding from the various classes considered
in dealing with the fourth encounter to those resulting
from the fifth, from these to those resulting from the
sixth, and so on. And although the accounts thus
requiring to be drawn up are easily dealt with, the
little sums would not present an appearance suited to these pages. I
therefore now proceed to consider only the results,
or rather such of the results as bear most upon my
subject.

@

After the fifth encounter there would be, persons who would have won
every game they had played, and as many who had lost
every game. These would represent the persistently
lucky and unlucky men of our gambling community.
There would be, who, having won four times in
succession, now lost, and as many who, having lost four
times in succession, now won. These would be the
examples of luck-good or bad-continued to a certain
stage, and then changing. The balance of our,,
amounting to seventeen millions and a half, would have
had varying degrees of luck, from those who had won
four games and lost one, to those
who had lost four games and won
but a single game. The bulk of the seventeen millions
and a half would include those who would have had no
reason to regard themselves as either specially lucky or
specially unlucky. But, of them would be
regarded as examples of a change of luck, being,
who had won the first three games and lost the remaining
two, and as many who had lost the first three games
and won the last two.

@

Thus, after the fifth game, there would be only
, of those regarded as persistently
lucky or unlucky, while there would be twice as many who would
be regarded by those who knew of their fortunes, and
of course by themselves, as examples of change of luck,
marked good or bad luck at starting, and then bad or
good luck.

@

So the games would proceed, half of the persistently
lucky up to a given game going out of that class at the
next game to become examples of a change of luck, so
that the number of the persistently lucky would rapidly
diminish as the play continued. So would the number
of the persistently unlucky continually diminish, half
going out at each new encounter to join the ranks of
those who had long been unlucky, but had at last experienced
a change of fortune.

@

After the twentieth game, if we suppose constant
exact halving to take place as far as possible, and then
to be followed by halving as near as possible, there
would be about a score who had won every game of the
twenty. No amount of reasoning would persuade these
players, or those who had heard of their fortunes, that
they were not exceedingly lucky persons-not in the
sense of being lucky because they won, but of
being at any time than any of those who
had taken part in the twenty games. They themselves
and their friends-ay, and their enemies too-would
conclude that they not lose. In like manner,
the score or so who had not won a single game out of
the twenty would be judged to be most unlucky persons,
whom it would be madness to back in any matter of
pure chance.

@

Yet-to pause for a moment on the case of these
apparently most manifest examples of persistent luck-the
result we have obtained has been to show that
inevitably there must be in a given number of trials
about a score of these cases of persistent luck, good or
bad, and about two score of cases where both good and
bad are counted together. We have shown that, without
imagining any antecedent luckiness, good or bad, there
must be what, to the players themselves, and to all who
heard of or saw what had happened to them, would
seem examples of the most marvellous luck. Supposing,
as we have, that the game is one of pure chance, so that
skill cannot influence it and cheating is wholly prevented,
all betting men would be disposed to say, These
twenty are persons whose good luck can be depended
on; we must certainly back them for the next game
and those other twenty are hopelessly unlucky; we may
lay almost any odds against their winning.

@

But it should hardly be necessary to say that that
which happen cannot be regarded as due to luck.
There must be set of twenty or so out of our twenty
millions who will win every game of twenty; and the
circumstance that this has befallen such and such persons
no more means that they are lucky, and is no more
a matter to be marvelled at, than the circumstance that
one person has drawn the prize ticket out of twenty
at a lottery is marvellous, or signifies that he would be
always lucky in lottery drawing.

@

The question whether those twenty persons who
had so far been persistently lucky would be better
worth backing than the rest of the twenty millions,
and especially than the other twenty who had persistently
lost, would in reality be disposed of at the
twenty-first trial in a very decisive way for of the
former score about half would lose, while of the latter
score about half would win. Among a thousand persons
who had backed the former set at odds there would
be a heavy average of loss; and the like among a thousand
persons who had laid against the latter set at
odds.

@

It may be said this is assertion only, that experience
shows that some men are lucky and others unlucky at
games or other matters depending purely on chance,
and it must be safer to back the former and to wager
against the latter. The answer is that the matter has
been tested over and over again by experience, with the
result that, as reasoning had shown, some men
are bound to be fortunate again and again in any
great number of trials, but that these are no more likely
to be fortunate on fresh trials than others, including
those who have been most unfortunate.

@

An objection will-about here-have vaguely presented
itself to believers in luck, viz. come off, greatly to the gratification
of believers in luck. In one case they could say,
I told you so, such luck as As was bound to pull him
through again; in the other, I told you so, such luck
was bound to change or if it were the loser of twenty
trials who was in question, then, I told you so, he was
bound to win at last; or, I told you so, such an unlucky
fellow was bound to lose. But unfortunately,
though the believers in luck thus run with the hare and
hunt with the hounds, though they are prepared to find
any and every event confirming their notions about luck,
yet when a score of trials or so are made, as in our supposed
case of a twenty-first game, the chances are that
they would be contradicted by the event. The twenty
constant winners would not be more lucky than the
twenty constant losers; but neither would they be less
lucky. The chances are that about half would win and
about half would lose. If one who really understands
the laws of probability could be supposed foolish enough
to wager money on either twenty, or on both, he
would unquestionably regard the betting as perfectly
even.

@

Let us return to the rest of our twenty millions of
players, though we need by no means consider all the
various classes into which they may be divided, for the
number of these classes amounts, in fact, to more than
a million.

@

The great bulk of the twenty millions would consist
of players who had won about as many games as they
had lost. The number who had won as many
games as they had lost would no longer form a large
proportion of the total, though it would form the largest
individual class. There would be nearly, of
these, while there would be about, who had
won eleven and lost nine, and as many who had won
nine and lost eleven; these two classes together would
outnumber the winners of ten games exactly, in the
proportion of to or thereabouts. Speaking generally,
it may be said that about two-thirds of the community
would consider they had had neither good luck nor
bad, though their opinion would depend on temperament
in part. For some men are more sensitive to losses than
to gains, and are ready to speak of themselves as unlucky,
when a careful examination of their varying fortunes
shows that they have neither won nor lost on the whole,
or have won rather more than they have lost. On the
other hand, there are some who are more exhilarated by
success than dashed by failure.

@

The number of those who, having begun with good
luck, had eventually been so markedly unfortunate,
would be considerable. It might be taken to include
all who had won the first six games and lost all the rest,
or who had won the first seven or the first eight, or any
number up to, say, the first fourteen, losing thence to
the end; and so estimated would amount to about,
an equal number being first markedly unfortunate, and
then constantly fortunate. But the number who had
experienced a marked change of luck would be much
greater if it were taken to include all who had
won a large proportion of the first nine or ten games
and lost a large proportion of the remainder, or 
. These two classes of players would 
be well represented.

@

Thus, then, we see that, setting enough persons
playing at any game of pure chance, and assuming
only that among any large number of players there
will be about as many winners as losers, irrespective of
luck, good or bad, all the five classes which gambling
folk recognise and regard as proving the existence of
luck, must inevitably make their appearance.

@

Even any special class which some believer in luck,
who was more or less fanciful, imagined he had recognised
among gambling folk, must inevitably appear
among our twenty millions of illustrative players. For
example, there would be about a score of players who
would have won the first game, lost the second, won
the third, and so on alternately to the end; and as
many who had also won and lost alternate games, but
had lost the first game; some forty, therefore, whose
fortune it seemed to be to win only after they had lost
and to lose only after they had won. Again, about
twenty would win the first five games, lose the next
five, win the third five, and lose the last five; and
about twenty more would lose the first five, win the
next, lose the third five, and win the last five about
forty players, therefore, who seemed bound to win and
lose always five games, and no more, in succession.

@

Again, if anyone had made a prediction that among
the players of the twenty games there would be one
who would win the first, then lose two, then win three,
then lose four, then win five, and then lose the remaining
five-and yet a sixth if the twenty-first game were
played-that prophet would certainly be justified by
the result. For about a score would be sure to have
just such fortunes as he had indicated up to the
twentieth game, and of these, nine or ten would be
 sure to win the twenty-first game also.

@

We see, then, that all the different kinds of luck-good,
bad, indifferent, or changing-which believers in
luck recognise, are bound to appear when any considerable
number of trials are made; and all the varied
ideas which men have formed respecting fortune and
her ways are bound to be confirmed.

@

It may be asked by some whether this is not proving
that there is such a thing as luck instead of over-throwing
the idea of luck. But such a question can
only arise from a confusion of ideas as to what is meant
by luck. If it be merely asserted that such and such
men have been lucky or unlucky, no one need dispute
the proposition; for among the millions of millions of
millions of purely fortuitous events affecting the millions
of persons now living, it could not but chance that
the most remarkable combinations, sequences, alternations,
and so forth, of events, lucky or unlucky, must
have presented themselves in the careers of hundreds.
Our illustrative case, artificial though it may seem, is
in reality not merely an illustration of life and its
chances, but may be regarded as legitimately demonstrating
what must inevitably happen on the wider
arena and amid the infinitely multiplied vicissitudes of
life. But the belief in luck involves much more. The
idea involved in it, if not openly expressed, is that some men are lucky by
nature, others unlucky, that such and such times and
seasons are lucky or unlucky, that the progress of
events may be modified by the lucky or unlucky influence
of actions in no way relating to them; as, for
instance, that success or failure at cards may be affected
by the choice of a seat, or by turning round thrice in
the seat. This form of belief in luck is not only akin
to superstition, it superstition. Like all superstition,
it is mischievous. It is, indeed, the very essence of the
gambling spirit, a spirit so demoralising that it blinds
men to the innate immorality of gambling. It is this
belief in luck, as something which can be relied on, or
propitiated, or influenced by such and such practices,
which is shown, by reasoning and experience alike, to
be entirely inconsistent not only with facts but with
possibility.

@

But oddly enough, the believers in luck show by
the form which their belief takes that in reality they
have no faith in luck any more than men really have
faith in superstitions which yet they allow to influence
their conduct. A superstition is an idle dread, or an
equally idle hope, not a real faith; and in like manner
is it with luck. A man will tell you that at cards, for
instance, he always has such and such luck; but if you
say, Let us have a few games to see whether you will
have your usual luck, you will usually find him unwilling
to let you apply the test. If you try it, and
the result is unfavourable, he argues that such peculiarities
of luck never do show themselves when submitted
to test. On the other hand, if it so chances
that on that particular occasion he has the kind of
luck which he claims to have, he expects you
to accept the evidence as decisive. Yet the result
means in reality only that certain events, the chances
for and against which were probably pretty equally
divided, have taken place.

@

So, if a gambler has the notion that turning round thrice in his
chair will change the luck, he is by no means corrected
of the superstition by finding the process fail on any
particular occasion. But if the bad luck which has
hitherto pursued him chances to be replaced by good or even by
moderate luck, after the gambler has gone through the
mystic process described, or some other equally absurd
and irrelevant manuvre, then the superstition is confirmed.
Yet all the time there is no real faith in it.
Such practices are like the absurd invocation of Indian
medicine men; there is a sort of vague hope that
something good may come of them, no real faith in
their efficacy.

@

The best proof of the utter absence of real faith in
superstitions about luck, even among gambling men,
the most superstitious of mankind, may be found in the
incongruity of their two leading ideas. If there are
two forms of expression more frequently than any
others in the mouth of gambling men, they are those
which relate to being in luck or out of luck on the one
hand, and to the idea that luck must change on the
other. Professional gamblers, like Steinmetz and his
kind, have become so satisfied that these ideas are
sound, whatever else may be unsound, in regard to
luck, that they have invented technical expressions to
present these theories of theirs, failing utterly to notice
that the ideas are inconsistent with each other, and
cannot both be right-though both may be wrong, and
are so.

@

A player is said to be in the vein when he has
for some time been fortunate. He should only go on
playing, if he is wise, at such a time, and at such a
time only should he be backed. Having been lucky he
is likely, according to this notion, to continue lucky.
But, on the other hand, the theory called the maturity
of the chances teaches that the luck cannot continue
more than a certain time in one direction; when it has
reached maturity in that direction it must change.
Therefore, when a man has been in the vein for a
certain time, it is unsafe to back him, for he must
be on the verge of a change of luck.

@

Of course the gambler is confirmed in his superstition,
whichever event may befall in such cases. When
he wins he applauds himself for following the luck, or
for duly anticipating a change of luck, as the case may
be; when he loses, he simply regrets his folly in not
seeing that the luck must change, or in not standing
by the winner.

@

And with regard to the idea that luck must change,
and that in the long run events must run even, it is
noteworthy how few gambling men recognise either, on
the one hand, how inconsistent this idea is with their
belief in luck which may be trusted, or, on the other hand, the real
way in which luck comes even after a sufficiently
long run.

@

A man who has played long with success goes on
because he regards himself as lucky. A man who has
played long without success goes on because he considers
that the luck is bound to change. The latter goes on
with the idea that, if he only plays long enough, he
must at least at some time or other recover his losses.

@

Now there can be no manner of doubt that if a man,
possessed of sufficient means, goes on playing for a very
long time, his gains and losses will eventually be very
nearly equal; assuming always, of course, that he is not
swindled-which, as we are dealing with gambling
men, is perhaps a sufficiently bold assumption. Yet it
by no means follows that, if he starts with considerable
losses, he will ever recover the sum he has thus had to
part with, or that his losses may not be considerably
increased. This sounds like a paradox; but in reality
the real paradox lies in the opposite view.

@

This may be readily shown.

@

The idea to be controverted is this that if a gambler
plays long enough there must come a time when
his gains and his losses are exactly balanced. Of
course, if this were true, it would be a very strong
argument against gambling; for what but loss of time
can be the result of following a course which must
inevitably lead you, if you go on long enough, to the
place from which you started? But it is not true. If
it were true, of course it involves the inference that, no
matter when you enter on a course of gambling, you
are bound after a certain time to find yourself where
you were at that beginning. It follows that if you lose considerably in the first
few weeks or months of your gambling career, then, if
you only play long enough you must inevitably find
yourself as great a loser, on the whole, as you were when
you were thus in arrears through gambling losses; for
your play may be quite as properly considered to have
begun when those losses had just been incurred, as to
have begun at any other time. Hence this idea that,
in the long run, the luck must run even, involves the
conclusion that, if you are a loser or a gainer in the
beginning of your play, you must at some time or other
be equally a gainer or loser. This is manifestly inconsistent
with the idea that long-continued play will
inevitably leave you neither a loser nor a gainer. If,
starting from a certain point when you are a thousand
pounds in arrears, you are certain some time or other,
if you only play long enough, to have gained back that
thousand pounds, it is obvious that you are equally
certain some time or other 
to be yet another thousand pounds in arrears.
For there is no line of argument to prove you must
regain it, which will not equally prove that some time
or other you must be a loser by that same amount, over
and above what you had already lost when beginning
the games which were to put you right. If, then, you
are to come straight, you must be able certainly to
recover two thousand pounds, and by parity of reasoning
four thousand, and again twice that; and so on 
 which is manifestly absurd.

@

The real fact is, that while the laws of probabilities
do undoubtedly assure the gambler that his losses and
gains will in the long run be nearly equal, the kind of
equality thus approached is not an equality of actual
amount, but of proportion. If two men keep on tossing
for sovereigns, it becomes more and more unlikely,
the longer they toss, that the difference between them
will fall short of any given sum. If they go on till
they have tossed twenty million times, the odds are
heavily in favour of one or the other being a loser of at
least a thousand pounds. But the proportion of the
amount won by one altogether, to the amount won altogether
by the other, is almost certain to be very nearly
a proportion of equality. Suppose, for example, that at
the end of twenty millions of tossings, one player is a
winner of then he must have won in all
 the other having won in all 
the ratio of these amounts is that of to,
or to This is very nearly the ratio of
 to, or is scarcely distinguishable, practically,
from actual equality. Now if these men had only
tossed eight times for sovereigns, it might very well
have happened that one would have won five or six
times, while the other had only won thrice or twice.
Yet with a ratio of to, or to, against the loser,
he would actually be out of pocket only in one case
and in the other; while in the other case, with a
ratio of almost perfect equality, he would be the loser
of a thousand pounds.

@

But now it might appear that, after all, this is
proving too much, or, at any rate, proves as much on
one side as on the other; for if one player loses the
other must gain; if a certain set of players lose the
rest gain and it might seem as though, with the prevalent
ideas of many respecting gambling games, the
chance of winning were a sufficient compensation for
the chance of losing.

@

Where a man is so foolish that the chance of having
more money than he wants is equivalent in his mind
 to the risk of being
deprived of the power of getting what is necessary for
himself and for his family, such reasoning may be
regarded as convincing. For those who weigh their
wants and wishes rightly, it has no value whatever.
On the contrary it may be shown that every wager or
gambling transaction, by a man of moderate means,
definitely reduces the actual value of his possessions,
even if the wager or transaction be a fair one. If a
man who has a hundred pounds available to meet his
present wants wagers against, or an equal
chance, he is no longer worth He, when
the bet is decided, be worth, or he may be worth
only All he can his property at is about
. Supposing the other man to be in the same position,
they are both impoverished as soon as they have
made the bet; and when the wager is decided, the
average value of their possessions in ready money is less
than it was; for the winner gains less by having his
. raised to, than the
loser suffers by having his ready money halved.

@

Similar remarks apply to participation in lottery
schemes, or the various forms of gambling at places
like San Carlo. Every sum wagered means, at the
moment when it is staked, a depreciation of the gamblers
property; and would mean that, even if the terms
on which the wagering were conducted were strictly fair.
But this is never the case. In all lotteries and in all
established systems of gambling certain odds are always
retained in favour of those who work the lottery or
the gambling system. These odds make gambling in
either form still more injurious to those who take part
in it. Winners of course there are, and in some few
cases winners may retain a large part of their gains, or
at any rate expend them otherwise than in fresh gambling.
Yet it is manifest that, apart from the circumstance
that the of the gambling gains of one set
of persons never counterbalance the of the gambling
losses of others, there is always a large deduction
to be made on account of the wild and reckless waste
of money won by gambling. In many cases, indeed,
large gambling gains have brought ruin to the unfortunate
winner set on horseback by lightly acquired
wealth, and unaccustomed to the position, he has ridden
straightway to the devil.

@

But the greed for chance-won wealth is so great
among men of weak minds, and they are so large a
majority of all communities, that the bait may be
dangled for them without care to conceal the hook. In
all lotteries and gambling systems which have yet been
known the hook has been patent, and the evil it must
do if swallowed should have been obvious. Yet it has
been swallowed greedily.

@

A most remarkable illustration of the folly of those
who trust in luck, and the cool audacity of those who
trust in such folly, with more reason but with more
rascality, is presented by the Louisiana Lottery in
America. This is the only lottery of the kind now
permitted in America. Indeed, it is nominally restricted
to the State of Louisiana; but practically the whole
country takes part in it, tickets being obtainable by
residents in every State of the Union. The peculiarity
of the lottery is The
advertisements announce that each month,
tickets will be sold, each at five dollars, shares of one-fifth
being purchasable at one dollar. Two commissioners-Generals
Early and Beauregard-control the
drawings; so that we are told, and may well believe,
the drawings are conducted with fairness and honesty,
and in good faith to all parties. So far all is well. We
see that each month, if all the tickets are sold, the sum
of, dols and taking the sum of thus collected, were to
say The lottery, gentlemen gamblers, will now proceed;
. of the sum before me I will distribute in
prizes, as follows ; the rest, this sum of,
which I have here separated, I will put into my own
pocket for my trouble
in getting up this lottery? The Louisiana Lottery is
a transaction of the same rascally type-not rendered
more respectable by being on a very much larger scale.
If the spirit of rash speculation will let men submit
to swindling so gross as this, we can scarcely see any
limit to its operation. Yet hundreds of thousands yield
to the temptation thus offered, to gain suddenly a large
sum, at the expense of a small sum almost certainly lost,
and partly stolen.

@

It should be known-though, perhaps, even this
knowledge would not keep the moths away from the
destruction to which they seem irresistibly lured-that
gambling carried on long enough is not probable but
certain ruin. There is no sum, however large, which is
not certain to be absorbed at some time in the continuance
of a sufficiently long series of trials, even at fair
risks. Gamblers with moderate fortunes overlook this.
In their idea, mistaken as it is, that luck must run even
at last, they forget that, before that last to which they
look has been reached, their last shilling may have
gone. If they were content even to stay till-possibly-gain
balanced loss, there would be some chance of escape.
But what real gambler ever was content with such an
aim as that? Luck must not only turn till loss has
been recouped, but run on till great gains have been
made. And no gambler was ever yet content to stay
his hand when winning, or to give up when he began
to lose again. The fatal faith in eventual good luck is
the source of all bad luck; it is in itself the worst luck
of all. Every gambler has this faith, and no gambler
who holds to it is likely long to escape ruin.

@



@

It might be supposed that those who are most familiar
with the actual results which present themselves in long
series of chance games would form the most correct
views respecting the conditions on which such results
depend-would be, in fact, freest from all superstitious
ideas respecting chance or luck. The gambler who
sees every system-his own infallible system included-foiled
by the run of events, who witnesses the discomfiture
of one gamester after another that for a time
had seemed irresistibly lucky, and who can number by
hundreds those who have been ruined by the love of
play, might be expected to recognise the futility of all
attempts to anticipate the results of chance combinations.
It is, however, but too well known that the
reverse is the case. The more familiar a man becomes
with the multitude of such combinations, the more
confidently he believes in the possibility of foretelling-not,
indeed, any special event, but-the general run
of several approaching events. There has never been a
successful gambler who has not believed that his success
 has been the result of
skilful conduct on his own part; and there has never been
a ruined gambler who has not believed that when
ruin overtook him he was on the very point of mastering
the secret of success. It is this fatal confidence which
gives to gambling its power of fascinating the lucky as
well as the unlucky. The winner continues to tempt
fortune, believing all the while that he is exerting
some special aptitude for games of chance, until the
inevitable change of luck arrives; and thereafter he
continues to play because he believes that his luck has
only deserted him for a time, and must presently return.
The unlucky gambler, on the contrary, regards his
losses as sacrifices to ensure the ultimate success of his
system, and even when he has lost his all, continues
firm in the belief that had he had more money to
sacrifice he could have bound fortune to his side for
ever.

@

I propose to consider some of the most common
gambling superstitions-noting, at the same time, that
like superstitions prevail respecting chance events even among those who never
gamble.

@

Houdin, in his interesting book, voil, has given some amusing instances of
the fruits of long gaming experience. They are presented,
says Steinmetz, from whose work,, I quote them, as the axioms of a professional
gambler and cheat. Thus we might expect that,
however unsatisfactory to men of honest mind, they
would at least savour of a certain sort of wisdom. Yet
these axioms, the fruit of long study directed by self-interest,
are all utterly untrustworthy.

@

Every game of chance, says this authority, presents
two kinds of chances that are very distinct-namely,
those relating to the person interested, that is
the player; and those inherent in the combinations of
the game. That is, we are to distinguish between the
chances proper to the game, and those depending on the
luck of the player. Proceeding to consider the chances
proper to the game itself, our friendly cheat sums them
all up in two rules. First-Though chance can bring
into the game all possible combinations, there are nevertheless
certain limits at which it seems to stop such,
for instance, as a certain number turning up ten times
in succession at roulette; this is possible, but it has
never happened. Secondly-In a game of chance, the
oftener the same combination has occurred in succession,
the nearer we are to the certainty that it will not
recur at the next cast or turn up. This is the most
elementary of the theories on probabilities; it is termed
 . Hence, he proceeds, a player must
come to the table not only in luck, but he must not
risk his money except at the instant prescribed by the
rules of the maturity of the chances. Then follow the
precepts for personal conduct-For gaming prefer
roulette, because it presents several ways of staking
your money-which permits the study of several. A
player should approach the gaming-table perfectly calm
and cool-just as a merchant or tradesman in treaty
about any affair. If he gets into a passion it is all
over with prudence, all over with good luck-for the
demon of bad luck invariably pursues a passionate
player. Every man who finds a pleasure in playing
runs the risk of losing. admission would appear, as we shall presently see,
to have been the fruit of genuine experience on our gamblers part
it only requires that, for the words runs the risk, we should read
incurs the certainty, to be incontrovertible.
A prudent player, before
undertaking anything, should put himself to the test to
discover if he is in vein or in luck. In all doubt
he should abstain. There are several persons who are
constantly pursued by bad luck to such I say-. Stubbornness at play is ruin. Remember that
Fortune does not like people to be overjoyed at her
favours, and that she prepares bitter deceptions for the
imprudent who are intoxicated by success. Lastly,
before risking your money at play, study your vein,
and the different probabilities of the game-termed, as
aforesaid, the maturity of the chances.

@

Before proceeding to exhibit the fallacy of the principles
here enunciated-principles which have worked
incalculable mischief-it may be well to sketch the
history of the scamp who enunciated them-so far, at
least, as his gambling successes are concerned. His
first meeting with Houdin took place at a subscription
ball, where he managed to fleece Houdin and
others to a considerable amount, contriving a dexterous
escape when detected. Houdin afterwards fell in with
him at Spa, where he found the gambler in the greatest
poverty, and lent him a small sum-to practise his
grand theories. This sum the gambler lost, and
Houdin advised him to take up a less dangerous occupation.
It was on this occasion, it would seem, that
the gambler revealed to Houdin the particulars recorded
in his book. A year afterwards Houdin unexpectedly
fell in with him again; but this time the
fellow was transformed into what is called a,
having succeeded to a large fortune on
the death of his brother who died intestate. According
to Houdin, the following was the mans declaration
at the auspicious meeting I have, he said, completely
renounced gaming; I am rich enough; and
care no longer for fortune. And yet, he added proudly,
if I now cared for the thing, how I could break those
bloated banks in their pride, and what a glorious
vengeance I could take of bad luck and its inflexible
agents! But my heart is too full of my happiness to
allow the smallest place for the desire of vengeance.
Three years later he died; and Houdin informs us that
he left the whole of his fortune to various charitable
institutions, his career after his acquisition of wealth
going far to demonstrate the justice of Becky Sharps
theory that it is easy to be honest on five thousand a
year.

@

It is remarkable that the principles enunciated above
are not merely erroneous, but self-contradictory. Yet
it is to be noticed that though they are presented as
the outcome of a life of gambling experiences, they
are in reality entertained by all gamblers, however
limited their experience, as well as by many who are
only prevented by the lack of opportunity from entering
the dangerous path which has led so many to
ruin. These contradictory superstitions may be called
severally-the gamblers belief in his own good luck,
and his faith in the turn of luck. When he is considering
his own fortune he does not hesitate to believe
that on the whole the Fates will favour him, though
this belief implies in reality the of favourable
conditions. On the contrary, when he is considering
the fortunes of others who are successful in their play
against him, he does not doubt that their good luck
will presently desert them, that is, he believes in the
 of favourable conditions in their case.

@

Taking in their order the gambling superstitions
which have been presented above, we have, first of all,
to inquire what truth there is in the idea that there
are limits beyond which pure chance has no power of
introducing peculiar combinations. Let us consider
this hypothesis in the light of actual experience. Mr.
Steinmetz tells us that, in, a Mr. Ogden wagered
, guineas to one that seven would not be thrown
with a pair of dice ten successive times. The wager
was accepted, and
strange to say his opponent threw seven At this point Mr. Ogden offered guineas
to be off the bet. But his opponent declined . He cast yet once more, and threw nine, so
that Mr. Ogden won his guinea.

@

Now here we have an instance of a most remarkable
series of throws, the like of which has never been
recorded before or since. Before those throws had
been made, it might have been asserted that the
throwing of nine successive sevens with a pair of
dice was a circumstance which chance could never
bring about, for experience was as much against such
an event as it would seem to be against the turning up
of a certain number ten successive times at
Yet experience now shows that the thing is possible;
and if we are to limit the action of chance, we must
assert that the throwing of seven times in succession
is an event which will never happen. Yet such
a conclusion obviously rests on as unstable a basis as
the former, of which experience has disposed. Observe,
however, how the two gamblers viewed this very eventuality.
Nine successive sevens had been thrown;
and if there were any truth in the theory that the
power of chance was limited, it might have been regarded
as all but certain that the next throw would
not be a seven. But a run of bad fortune had so
shaken Mr. Ogdens faith in his luck that he was
ready to pay guineas in order to
save his endangered thousand; and so confident was
his opponent that the run of luck would continue that
he declined this very favourable offer. Experience had
in fact shown both the players, that although sevens
could not be thrown for ever, yet there was no saying
when the throw would change. Both reasoned probably
that as an eighth throw had followed seven successive
throws of seven, and as a ninth
had followed eight successive throws, a tenth might well follow the nine . They were forced as it were by the run of events
to reason justly as to the possibility of a tenth throw
of seven-nay, to exaggerate that possibility into
probability; and it appears from the narrative that the
strange series of throws quite checked the betting propensities
of the bystanders, and that not one was led to
lay the wager that the tenth
throw would not give seven.

@

We have spoken of the unfairness of the original
wager. It may interest our readers to know exactly
how much should have been wagered against a single
guinea, that ten sevens would not be thrown. With
a pair of dice there are thirty-six possible throws, and
six of these give seven as the total. Thus the chance
of throwing seven is one sixth, and the chance of
throwing seven ten times running is obtained by
multiplying six into itself ten times, and placing the
resulting number under unity, to represent the minute
fractional chance required. It will be found that the
number thus obtained is,, and instead
of, guineas, fairness required that,
guineas should have been wagered against one guinea,
so enormous are the chances against the occurrence of
ten successive throws of seven. Even against nine
successive throws the fair odds would have been
, to one, or about forty thousand guineas to
a farthing. But when the nine throws of seven had
been made, the chance of a tenth throw of seven was
simply one-sixth as at the first trial. If there were
any truth in the theory of the maturity of the chances,
the chance of such a throw would of course be greatly
diminished. But even taking the mathematical value
of the chance, Mr. Ogden need in fairness only have
offered a sixth part of, guineas, or guineas, to be off his wager.
So that his opponent accepted in the first instance an
utterly unfair offer, and refused in the second instance a
sum exceeding by more than three hundred guineas the
real value of his chance.

@

Closely connected with the theory about the range
of possibility in the matter of chance combinations, is
the theory of the maturity of the chances-the most
elementary of the theories on probabilities. It might
safely be termed the most mischievous of gambling
superstitions.

@

As an illustration of the application of this theory,
we may cite the case of an Englishman, once well
known at foreign gambling-tables, who had based a
system on a generalisation of this theory. In point of
fact the theory asserts that when there has been a run
in favour of any particular event, the chances in favour
of the event are reduced, and therefore, necessarily,
the chances in favour of other events are increased.
Now our Englishman watched the play at the 
table for two full hours, carefully noting the numbers
which came up during that time. Then, eschewing
those numbers which had come up oftenest, he staked
his money on those which had come up very seldom or
not at all. Here was an infallible system according
to the most elementary of the theories of probability.
The tendency of chance-results to right themselves, so
that events equally likely in the first instance will
occur an equal number of times in the long run, was
called into action to enrich our gambler and to ruin
the unlucky bankers. Be it noted, in passing, that
events do thus right themselves, though this circumstance
does not operate quite as the gambler supposed,
and cannot be trusted to put a penny into any ones
pocket. The system was tried, however, and instead
of reasoning respecting its soundness, we may content
ourselves with recording the result. On the first day
our Englishman won more than seven hundred pounds
in a single hour. His exultation was boundless. He
thought he had really discovered the philosophers
stone. Off he went to his bankers, and transmitted
the greater portion of his winnings to London. The
next day he played and lost fifty pounds; and the
following day he achieved the same result, and had to
write to town for remittances. In fine, in a week he
had lost all the money he won at first, with the
exception of fifty pounds, which he reserved to take
him home; and being thoroughly convinced of the
exceeding fickleness of fortune, he has never staked a
sixpence since, and does all in his power to dissuade
others from playing.

@

He took a very sound principle of probabilities as
the supposed basis of his system, though in reality he
entirely mistook the nature of the principle. That
principle is, that where the chances for one or another
of two results are equal for each trial, and many trials
are made, the number of events of one kind will bear to
those of the other kind a very nearly equal ratio the
greater the number of events, the more nearly will the
ratio tend to equality. This is perfectly true; and
nothing could be safer than to wager on this principle.
Let a man toss a coin for an hour, and I would wager
confidently that neither will heads exceed tails, or
tails exceed heads in a greater ratio than that of
 to Let him toss for a day, and I would wager
as confidently that the inequality will not be greater
than that represented by the ratio of to Let
the tossing be repeated day after day for a year, and I
would wager my life that the disproportion will be less
than that represented by the ratio of, to 
Yet so little does this principle bear the interpretation
placed upon it by the inventor of the system above
described, that if on any occasion during this long-continued
process of tossings head had been tossed no less than twenty times in
succession, I would not wager a sixpence on the next
tossing giving tail, or trust a sixpence to the chance of
tail appearing oftener than head in the next five, ten,
or twenty tossings. Not only should reason show the
utter absurdity of supposing that a tossing, or a set of
five, ten, or twenty tossings, can be affected one way or
the other by past tossings, whether proximate or remote;
but the experiment has been tried, and it has appeared
 that after any
number of cases in which heads have appeared
such and such a number of times in succession, the next
tossing has given heads as often as it has given tails.
Thus, in cases, Buffon, in his famous tossing trial,
tossed tails four times running. On the next trial,
in these cases, head came times and tail 
times. So most certainly the tossing of tail four
times running had not diminished the tendency towards
tail being tossed. Among the cases which had
thus given tail five times running, failed to give
another tail, while the remaining gave another,
that is, a sixth tail. Of these, failed to give
another tail, while gave a seventh tail; and here
it might seem we have evidence of the effect of preceding
tosses. The disproportion is considerable, and
even to the mathematician the case is certainly curious;
but in so many trials such curiosities may always be
noticed. That it will not bear the interpretation put
upon it is shown by the next steps. Of the cases,
 failed to give another tail, while the remaining six
gave another, that is, an eighth tail; and these
numbers eight and six are more nearly equal than the
preceding numbers and ; so that the tendency to
change had certainly not increased at this step. However,
the numbers are too small in this part of the experiment
to give results which can be relied upon.
The cases in which the numbers were large prove unmistakably,
what reason ought to have made self-evident,
that past events of pure chance cannot in the
slightest degree affect the result of sequent trials.

@

To suppose otherwise is, indeed, utterly to ignore
the relation between cause and effect. When anyone
asserts that because such and such things have happened,
therefore such and such other events will happen, he
ought at least to be able to show that the past events
have some direct influence on those which are thus said
to be affected by them. But if I am going to toss a
coin perfectly at random, in what possible way can the
result of the experiment be affected by the circumstance
that during ten or twelve minutes before, I tossed head
only or tail only?

@

The system of which I now propose to speak is more
plausible, less readily put to the full test, and consequently
far more dangerous than the one just described.
In it, as in the other, reliance is placed on a change
after a run of any kind, but not in the same way.

@

Everyone is familiar with the method of renewing
wagers on the terms double or quits. It is a very
convenient way of getting rid of money which has been
won on a wager by one who does not care for wagering,
and, not being to the manner born, does not feel comfortable
in pocketing money won in this way. You
have rashly backed some favourite oarsman, let us say,
or your college boat, or the like, for a level sovereign,
not caring to win, but accepting a challenge to so wager
rather than seem to want faith in your friend, college,
or university. You thus find yourself suddenly the
recipient of a coin to which you feel you are about as
much entitled as though you had abstracted it from the
other bettors pocket. You offer him double or quits,
tossing the coin. Perhaps he loses, when you would be
entitled to two sovereigns. You repeat the offer, and if
he again loses,
you again repeat it, until at last he wins the toss. Then
you are quits, and can be happy again.

@

The system of winning money corresponds to this
safe system of getting rid of money which has been
uncomfortably won. Observe that if you only go on
long enough with the double-or-quits method, as above,
you are sure to get rid of your sovereign; for your
friend cannot go on losing for ever. He might, indeed,
lose nine or ten times running, when he would owe you
. or and if he then lost heart, while yet he
regarded his loss, like his first wager, as a debt of honour
from which you could not release him, matters would
be rather awkward. If he lost twenty times he would
owe you a million, which would be more awkward still;
except that, having gone so far, he could not make
matters worse by going a little farther; and in a few
more tossings you would get rid of your millions as
completely as of the sovereign first won. Still, speaking
generally, this double-or-quits method is a sure and
easy way of clearing such scores. But it may be reversed
and become a pretty sure and easy way of making
money.

@

Suppose a man, whom we will call A, to wager with
another, B, one sovereign on a tossing . If he
wins, he gains a sovereign. Suppose, however, he loses
his sovereign. Then let him make a new wager of two
sovereigns. If he wins, he is the gainer of one sovereign
in all if he loses, he has lost three in all. In the latter
case let him make a new wager, of four sovereigns. If
he wins, he gains one sovereign; if he loses, he has
lost seven in all. In this last case let him wager
eight sovereigns. Then, if he wins, he has gained one
sovereign, and if he loses he has lost fifteen. Wagering
sixteen sovereigns in the latter case, he gains one in all
if he wins, and has lost thirty-one in all if he loses. So
he goes on doubling
his wager continually, until at last he wins. Then he
has gained one sovereign. He can now repeat the
process, gaining each time a sovereign whenever he
wins a tossing. And manifestly in this way A can
most surely and safely win every sovereign B has. Yet
every wager has been a perfectly fair one. We seem,
then, to see our way to a safe way of making any
quantity of money. B, of course, would not allow this
sort of wagering to go on very long. But the bankers
of a gambling establishment undertake to accept any
wagers which may be offered, on the system of their
game, whether, roulette, or what not,
between certain limits of value in the stakes. Say these
limits are from to, as I am told is not uncommonly
the case. A man may wager on this plan,
and double eight times before his doublings carry the
stake above Or with more advantage he may let
the successive stakes be such that the eighth doubling
will make the maximum sum, or; so that the
stakes in inverse order will be,,

, and, lastly,
. nine stakes, or eight doublings in all. It is so
utterly unlikely, says the believer in this system, that
where the chances are practically equal on two events,
the same event will be repeated nine times running,
that I may safely apply this method, gaining at each
venture,
until at last I shall accumulate in this way a small
fortune, which in time will become a large fortune.

@

The proprietors of gambling houses naturally encourage
this pleasing delusion. They call this power of
varying the stakes a very important advantage possessed
by the player at such tables. They say, truly enough,
a single player would not wager if the stakes could be
varied in this manner, and he possessed no power of refusing
any offer between such limits. Since a single
player would refuse to allow this arrangement, it is
manifest the arrangement is a privilege. Being a
privilege, it is worth paying for. It is on this account
that we poor bankers, who oblige those possessed of
gambling propensities by allowing them to exercise
their tastes that way, must have a certain small percentage
of odds in our favour. Thus at 
we really must have one of the refaits allowed us, say
the first, the, though any other would suit
us equally well but even then we do not win what is
on the table; the may go against us, when the
players save their stakes, and if we win we only win
what has been staked on one colour, and so forth.

@

Those who like gambling, too, and so like to believe
that the bankers are strictly fair, adopt this argument.
Thus the editor of says The
Table at all games has an extra chance, a chance varying
from one zero at one table to two at another; that is a
chance every player understands when he sits down to
play, That this
advantage over a long series must tell is as certain as
that two and two make four. But.... the bank
does not always win; on the contrary, we often hear
of the bank being broken and closed until more cash is
forthcoming. The number of times the bank loses
and nothing is said about it, would amount to a considerable
number of times in the course of a year. A
small percentage on one side or the other, extended over
a long enough series, will tell; but on a single event
the difference in the gamblers eyes is small. For that percentage the punter is
enabled to vary his stakes from say, to Without
some such advantage, no one would permit his
adversaries thus to vary the stakes. The punter is willing to pay for this advantage.

@

And all the while the truth is that the supposed
advantage is no advantage at all-at least, to the player.
It is of immense advantage to the bankers, because it
encourages so many to play who otherwise might refrain.
But in reality the bankers would make the same winnings
if every stake were of a fixed amount, say,
as when the stakes can be varied-always assuming
that as many players would come to them, and play as
freely, as on the present more attractive system.

@

Let us consider the actual state of the case, when a
player at a table doubles his stakes till he wins-repeating
the process from the lowest stakes after each
success.

@

But first-or rather, as a part of this inquiry-let
us consider why our imaginary player B would decline
to allow A to double wagers in the manner described.
In reality, of course, As power of doubling is limited
by the amount of As money, or of his available money
for gambling. He cannot go on doubling the stakes
when he has paid away more than half his money.
Suppose, for instance, he has in notes and
or so in sovereigns. But if he loses his last
wager he will have paid away and must stop for
the time, leaving B the gainer of that sum. This is a
very unlikely result for a single trial. It would not be
likely to happen in a hundred or in two hundred trials,
though it might happen at the first trial, or at a very
early one. Even if it happened after five hundred
trials, A would only have won in those, and B
winning at the last, would have much the better
of the encounter.

@

Why, then, would not B be willing to wager on
these terms? For precisely the same reason that he should be
unwilling to pay for one ticket out of, where
the prize was Each ticket would be fairly worth
that sum. And many foolish persons, as we know, are
willing to pay in that way for a ticket in a lottery, even
paying more than the correct value. But no one of any
sense would throw away a sovereign for the chance of winning a thousand
pounds. That, really, is what B declines to do. Every
venture he makes with A is a wager on just such terms. B wins
nothing unless he wins he loses at each
failure His chance of winning, too, is the same, at
each venture, as that of drawing a single marked ticket
from a bag containing, tickets. Each venture,
though it may be decided at the first or second tossing,
is a venture of ten tossings. Now, with ten tossings
there are, possible results, any one of which is as
likely as any other. One of these, and one only, is
favourable to B, viz though, in reality, he does
not pay the pound until the venture is decided against
him; so that, if he wins, he receives corresponding
 to the total just named.

@

Now, to wager a pound in this way, for the chance
of winning would be very foolish; and though
continually repeating the experiment would in the long
run make the number of successes bear the right proportion
to the number of failures, yet B might be
ruined long before this happened, though quite as probably
A would be ruined. Bs ruin, if effected, would
be brought about by steadily continued small losses, As
by a casual but overwhelming loss. The richer B and
A were, the longer it would be before one or other was
ruined, though the eventual ruin of one or other would
be certain. If one was much richer than the other, his
chance of escaping ruin would be so much the greater,
and so much greater, therefore, the risk of the poorer.
In other words, the odds would be great in favour of the
richer of the two, whether A or B, absorbing the whole
property of the other, if wagering on this plan were
continued steadily for a long time.

@

Now, if we extend such considerations as these to
the case in which an individual player contends against
a bank, we shall see that, even without any percentage
on the chances, the odds would be largely in favour of
the bank. If the player is persistent in applying his
system, he is practically certain to be ruined. For it is
to be noticed that in such a system the player is exposed
to that which he can least afford, namely, sudden and
great loss; it is by such losses that his ruin will be
brought about if at all. On the other hand, the bank,
which can best afford such losses, has to meet only
a steady slow drain upon its resources, until the inevitable
 comes which restore all that had been thus
drained out, and more along with it. If the player
were even to carry on his system in the manner which
my reasoning has really implied; if, as he made his
small gain at each venture, he set it by to form a reserve
fund-even then his ruin would be inevitable in the
long run. But every one knows that gamblers do
nothing of the sort. Lightly come, lightly go, is their
rule, so far as their gains are concerned. [In another
sense, their rule is, lightly come 
and heavily go when the last pound has been staked and
lost.] Thus they run a risk which, in their way of
playing, amounts almost to a certainty of ruining themselves,
and they do not even take the precaution which
would alone give them their one small, almost evanescent
chance of escape. On the other hand, the bankers,
who are really playing an almost perfectly safe game,
leave nothing to chance. The bulk of the money gained
by them is reserved to maintain the balance necessary
for safety. Only the actual profits of their system-the
percentage of gain due to their percentage on the chances-is
dealt with as income; that is, as money to be spent.

@

It is true that in one sense the case between the
bankers and the public resembles that of a player with
a small capital against a player with a large capital;
the bankers have indeed a large capital, but it is small
compared with that of the public at large who frequent
the gaming-tables. But, in the first place, this
does not at all help any single player. It is all but
certain that the public will not be ruined as a whole, just as it
is all but certain that the whole of an army engaged in
a campaign, even under the most unfavourable circumstances,
will not be destroyed if recruits are always
available at short notice. Now, if the circumstances of
a campaign are such that each individual soldier runs
exceeding risk of being killed, it will not improve the
chances of any single soldier that the army as a whole
will not be destroyed; and in like manner those who
gamble persistently are not helped in their ruin by the
circumstance that, as one is pushed from the board,
others ever succeed. Even the chance of the bank
being ruined, however, is not favourable to the gambler
who follows such a system as I am dealing with, but
positively adds to his risks. In the illustrative case of
A playing B, the ruin of B meant that A had gained
all Bs money. But in the case of a gambler playing on
the doubling system at a gaming-table, the ruin of the
bank would be one of the chances against him that such
a gambler would have to take into account. It might
happen when he was far on in a long process of doubling,
and would be almost certain to happen when he had to
some degree entered on such a process. He would then
be certainly a loser on that particular venture. If a
winner on the event actually decided when the bank
broke, he would perhaps receive a share, but
a share only, of the available assets. The rules of the
table may be such that these will always cover the stakes,
and in that case the player, supposing he had won on
the last event decided, would sustain no loss. Should
he have lost on that event, however, which ordinarily
would at least not interfere with the operation of his
system, he is prevented from pursuing the system till he
has recouped his loss. This can never happen in play
between two gamblers on this system. For the very
circumstance that A has lost an event involves of necessity
the possession by B of enough money to continue
the system. Bs stake after winning is always double
the last stake, but after winning the amount just staked
of course he must possess double that amount-since he
has his winnings and also a sum at least equal, which
he must have had when he wagered an equal stake.
But when a player at the gaming-tables loses an event
in one of his ventures, it by no means follows equally
that the bank can continue to double . Losses
against other players may compel the bank to close when
the system player has just lost a tolerably heavy
His system then is defeated, and he sustains a loss
distinct in character from those which his system normally
involves. In other words, the chances against
him are increased; and, on the other hand, the bankers
chance of ruin would be small, even if they had no
advantage in the odds, simply because the sum staked
bears a much smaller proportion to their capital than the
wagers of the individual player bear to his property.

@

Yet the reader must not fall into the mistake of
supposing that because the individual player would have
enormous risks against him, even if the bankers took no
percentage on the chances, the bank would then in the
long run make enormous gains. That would be a paradoxical
result; though at first sight it seems equally
paradoxical to say that while every single player would
be almost certain to be ruined the bank would not
gain in the long run. This, however, is perfectly true.
The fact is, that, among the few who escaped ruin, some
would be enormous gainers. It would be because of
some marvellous runs of luck, and consequent enormous
gains, that they would be saved from ruin; and the
chances would be that some among these would be very
heavy gainers. They would be few; and the action of a
man who gambled heavily on the chance of being one of
these few, would be like that of a man who bought
half a dozen tickets, at a price of each, among millions of
tickets in a lottery, in which were a few prizes of
 each. But though the smallness of the
chance of being one among the few very great gainers at
the gambling-table, makes it absurd for a man to run the
enormous risk of ruin involved in persistent play, yet,
so far as the bankers would be concerned, the great
losses on the few winners would in the long run equalise
the moderate gains on the great majority of their
customers. They would neither gain nor lose a sum
bearing any considerable proportion to their ventures,
and would run some risk, though only a small one,
of being swamped by a long-continued run of bad
luck.

@

But the bankers do not in this way leave matters to
chance. They take a percentage on the chances. The
percentage they take is often not very large in itself,
though it is nearly always larger than it appears, even
when regarded properly as a percentage on the chances.
But what is usually overlooked by those who deal with
this matter, and especially by those who, being gamblers
themselves, to think that gaming houses give them
very fair chances, is that a very small percentage on the
chances may mean, and necessarily does mean, an
enormous percentage of profits.

@

Let us take, as illustrating both the seeming smallness
of the percentage on the chances, and the enormous
probable percentage of profits, the game of,
so far as it can be understood from the accounts
given in the books.
I follow De Morgans rendering
of these confused and imperfect accounts. It seems to
be correct, for his computation of the odds for and
against the player leads to the same result as Poisson
obtained, who knew the game, though he nowhere gives
a description of it.

@

A number of packs is taken, and
the cards are well mixed. Bach common card counts
for the number of spots on it, and the court cards are
each reckoned as ten. A table is divided into two compartments,
one called, the other, and a player
stakes his money in which he pleases. The proprietor
of the bank, who risks against all comers, then lays
down cards in one compartment until the number of
spots exceeds thirty; as soon as this has happened, he
proceeds in the same way with the other compartment.
The number of spots in each compartment is thus
necessarily between and, both inclusive. The compartment
in which the total number of spots is least is
the winning one. Thus, if there are spots on the
cards in the, and on the cards in the,
 wins, and all players who staked upon receive
from the bank sums equal to their stakes. The process
is then repeated. So far, it will be observed, the chances
are equal for the players and for the bankers. It will
also be observed that the arrangement is one which
strongly favours the idea that the bankers have
little interest in the result. For the bank does not back
either colour. The players have all the backing to
themselves. If they choose to stake more in all on the
red than on the black, it becomes the banks interest
that black should win; but it was by the players own
acts that black became for the time the banks colour.
And not only does this suggest to the players the incorrect
idea, that the bank has little real interest in
the game, but it encourages the correct idea, which it is
the manifest interest of the bankers to put very clearly
before the players, that everything is fairly managed.
If the bank chose a colour, some might think that the
cards, however seemingly shuffled, were in reality arranged,
or else were so manipulated as to make the
banks colour win oftener than it should do. But since
the players themselves settle which shall be the banks
colour at each trial, there cannot be suspicion of foul
play of this sort.

@

We now come to the banks advantage on the
chances. The number of spots in the black and red
compartments may be equal. In this case the game is drawn; and the players may
either withdraw, increase, or diminish their stakes, as
they please, for a new game, if the number of spots in
each compartment is any except. But if the number
in each be, then the players are not allowed to withdraw their
stakes. And not only must the stakes remain for a new
game, but, whatever happens on this new trial, the
players will receive nothing. Their stakes are for the
moment impounded . The new game, unless it
chances to give another, will end in favour of
either or Whichever compartment wins, the
players in that compartment save their stakes, but
receive nothing from the bank; the players who have
put their stakes in the other compartment lose them.
De Morgan says here, not quite correctly, should the
bank win it takes the stakes, should the bank lose the
player recovers his stakes. This is incorrect, because
it at least suggests the incorrect idea that the bank may
either win or the stakes go clear; whereas in reality,
except in the improbable event of all the players backing
one colour, the bank is sure to win something, viz
either the stakes in the red or those in the black compartment,
and the only point to be settled is whether
the larger or the smaller of these probably unequal
sums shall pass to the banks exchequer. If the s
gives a second, the stakes still remain impounded,
and another game is played, and no stakes are released
until either or has won. But in the meantime
new stakes may be put down, before the fate of
the impounded stakes has been decided.

@

Thus, whereas, with regard to games decided at the
first trial, the bank has in the long run no interest one
way or the other, the bank has an exceptional interest
in A at once gives the
bank a certainty of winning the least sum staked in
the two compartments, and an equal chance of winning
the larger sum instead. Any gives the bank
the chance that on a new trial a may
be made; and though this chance is small, it tells in the long run and
must be added to the advantage obtained from the
chance of a at once.

@

Now it may seem as though the bank would gain
very little from so small an advantage. A may
occur tolerably often in any long series of trials, but a
 only at long intervals. It is only one
out of ten different, which to the uninitiated
seem all equally likely to occur; so that he supposes
the chance of a to be only one-tenth
of the chance that there will
be a of some sort. But, to begin with, this supposition
is incorrect. Calculation shows that the chance of
a of some sort occurring is, in, or
nearly one in nine. The chance of a 
is not one-tenth of this, or about in, but
 in, or twice as great as the uninitiated
imagine. Thus in very nearly two games in,
instead of one game in, a occurs.
It follows from this, combined with the circumstance
that on the average the bank wins half its stakes only
in the case of one of these,
that the mathematical advantage of the bank is
very nearly one-ninetieth of all the sums deposited.
And in passing it may be noticed as affording good
illustration of the mistakes the uninitiated are apt to
make in such matters, that if instead of the 
the bankers took to themselves the,
then, instead of this percentage per deposit, the percentage
would be only, or per

@

But even an average advantage of per on
each deposit made by the bank is thought by the frequenters
of the table to be very slight. It makes the odds
against the players about to on each trial, and the
difference seems trifling. On considering the probable
results of a years play, however, we find that the
bankers could obtain tremendous interest for a capital
which would make them far safer against ruin than is
thought necessary in any ordinary mercantile business.
I follow De Morgan in taking these numbers, which are
far below what would generally be deposited in 
evenings of play. Now, it can be shown that if the
bankers started with such a sum as they would
be practically safe from all chance of ruin. So that in
 playing nights they would probably make cent. As he justly says, the
preceding results, or either of them, being admitted,
it might be supposed hardly necessary to dwell upon
the ruin which must necessarily result to individual
players against a bank which has so strong a chance of
success against its united antagonists. But, he adds,
so strangely are opinions formed upon this subject,
that it is not uncommon to find persons who think they
are in possession of a specific by which they must infallibly
win. If both the banker and the player staked
on each game -th part of their respective funds,
and the play was to continue till one or other side was
ruined, the bank would have chances to in its
favour against that one player. But if, as more commonly
is the case, the players stake formed a far larger
proportion of his property, these odds would be immensely
increased. If a player staked one-tenth of his
money on each game against the same sum, supposed
to be -th of the banks money, the chances would
be to that he would be ruined if he persisted
long enough. In other words, his chance of escaping
ruin would be the same as that of drawing one single
marked ball out of a bag containing

@

Other games played at the gaming-tables, however
different in character they may be from,
give no better chances to the players. Indeed, some
games give far inferior chances. There is not one of
them at which any system of play can be safe in the
long run. If the system is such that the risk on each
venture is small, then the gains on each venture will
be correspondingly small. Many ventures, therefore,
must be made in order to secure any considerable
gains; and when once the number of ventures is
largely increased, the small risk on each becomes a
large risk, and if the ventures be very numerous
becomes practically a certainty of loss. On the other
hand there are modes of venturing which, if successful
once only, bring in a large profit; but they involve a
larger immediate risk.

@

In point of fact, the supposition that any system
can be devised by which success in games of chance
may be made certain, is as utterly unphilosophical as
faith in the invention of perpetual motion. That the
supposition has been entertained by many who have
passed all their lives in gambling proves only-what
might also be safely inferred from the very fact of their
being gamblers-that they know nothing of the laws
of probability. Many men who have passed all their
lives among machinery believe confidently in the possibility
of perpetual motion. They are familiar with
machinery, but utterly ignorant of mechanics. In like
manner, the life-long gambler is familiar with games
of chance, but utterly ignorant of the laws of chance.

@

It may appear paradoxical to say that chance results
right themselves-nay, that there is an absolute
certainty that in the long run they will occur as often
 as their respective chances warrant,
and at the same time to assert that it is utterly
useless for any gambler to trust to this circumstance.
Yet not only is each statement true, but it is of first-rate
importance in the study of our subject that the
truth of each should be clearly recognised.

@

That the first statement is true, will perhaps not be
questioned. The reasoning on which it is based would
be too abstruse for these pages; but it has been experimentally
verified over and over again. Thus, if a coin
be tossed many thousands of times, and the numbers
of resulting heads and tails be noted, it is found,
not necessarily that these numbers differ from each
other by a very small quantity, but that their difference
is small compared with either. In mathematical phrase,
the two numbers are nearly in a ratio of equality. Again,
if a dice be tossed, say, six million times, then, although
there will not probably have been exactly a million
throws of each face, yet the number of throws of each
face will differ from a million by a quantity very small
indeed compared with the total number of throws. So
certain is this law, that it has been made the means of
determining the real chances of an event, or of ascertaining
facts which had been before unknown. Thus, De
Morgan relates the following story in illustration of
this law. He received it from a distinguished naval
officer, who was once employed to bring home a cargo
of dollars. At the end of the voyage, he says, it
was discovered that one of the boxes which contained
them had been forced; and on making further search
a large bag of dollars was discovered in the possession
of some one on board. The coins in the different
boxes were a mixture of all manner of dates and sovereigns;
and it occurred to the commander, that if the
contents of the boxes were sorted, a comparison of the
proportions of the different sorts in the bag, with those
in the box which had been opened, would afford strong
presumptive evidence one way or the other. This
comparison was accordingly made, and the agreement
between the distribution of the several coins in the bag
and those in the box was such as to leave no doubt as
to the former having formed a part of the latter. If
the bag of stolen dollars had been a small one the
inference would have been unsafe, but the great number
of the dollars corresponded to a great number of chance
trials; and as in such a large series of trials the several
results would be sure to occur in numbers corresponding
to their individual chances, it followed that the number
of coins of the different kinds in the stolen lot would
be proportional, or very nearly so, to the number of
those respective coins in the forced box. Thus, in this
case the thief increased the strength of the evidence
against him by every dollar he added to his ill-gotten
store.

@

We may mention, in passing, an even more curious
application of this law, to no less a question than that
much-talked of but little understood problem, the
squaring of the circle. It can be shown by mathematical
reasoning, that, if a straight rod be so tossed
at random into the air as to fall on a grating of equidistant
parallel bars, the chance of the rod falling
through depends on the length and thickness of the
rod, the distance between the parallel bars, the
proportion in which the circumference of a circle exceeds
the diameter. So that when the rod and grating
have been carefully measured, it is only necessary to
know the proportion just mentioned in order to calculate
the chance of the rod falling through. But also,
if we can learn in some other way the chance of the rod
falling through, we can infer the proportion referred to.
Now the law we are considering teaches us that if we
only toss the rod often enough, the chance of its falling
through will be indicated by the number of times it
actually does fall through, compared with the total
number of trials. Hence we can estimate the proportion
in which the circumference of a circle exceeds the
diameter by merely tossing a rod over a grating several
thousand times, and counting how often it falls through.
The experiment has been tried, and Professor De Morgan
tells us that a very excellent evaluation of the celebrated
proportion was the result.

@

And let it be noticed, in passing, that this inexorable
law-for in its effects it is the most inflexible of all the
laws of probability-shows how fatal it must be to
contend long at any game of pure chance, where the
odds are in favour of our opponent. For instance, let
us assume for a moment that the assertion of the foreign
gaming bankers is true, and that the chances are but
from to per cent. or on each, or may lose considerably;
but where thousands of hundreds are wagered, the bank
will certainly win about their percentage, and the players
will therefore lose to a corresponding extent. This is
inevitable, so only that the play continue long enough.
Now, it is sometimes forgotten that to ensure such gain
to the bank, it is by no means necessary that the players
should come prepared to stake so many hundreds of
pounds. Those who sit down to play may not have a
tithe of the sum necessary-if only wagered once-to
ensure the success of the bank. But every florin the
players bring with them may be, and commonly is,
wagered over and over again. There is repeated gain
and loss, and loss and gain; insomuch that the player
who finally loses a hundred pounds, may have wagered
in the course of the sitting a thousand or even many
thousand pounds. Those fortunate beings who break
the bank from time to time, may even have accomplished
the feat of wagering millions during the process
which ends in the final loss of the few thousands they
may have begun with.

@

Why is it, then, it will be asked, that this inexorable
law is yet not to be trusted? For this reason, simply,
that the mode of its operation is altogether uncertain.
If in a thousand trials there has been a remarkable
preponderance of any particular class of events, it is
not a whit more probable that the preponderance will
be compensated by a corresponding deficiency in the
next thousand trials than that it will be repeated in
that set also. The most probable result of the second
thousand trials is precisely that result which was most
probable for the first thousand-that is, that there will
be no marked preponderance either way. But there
 such a preponderance; and it may lie either
way. It is the same with the next thousand, and the
next, and for every such set. They are in no way
affected by preceding events. In the nature of things,
how can they be? But, the whirligig of time brings
in its revenges in its own way. The balance is restored
just as chance directs. It may be in the next thousand
trials, it may be not before many thousands of trials.
We are utterly unable to guess when or how it will be
brought about.

@

But it may be urged that this is mere assertion; and
many will be very ready to believe that it is opposed to
experience, or even contrary to common sense. Yet
experience has over and over again confirmed the
matter, and common sense, though it may not avail to
unravel the seeming paradox, yet cannot insist on the
absurdity that coming events of pure chance are affected
by completed events of the same kind. If a person
has tossed heads nine times running, common
sense teaches him, as he is about to make the tenth
trial, that the chances on that trial are precisely the
same as the chances on the first. It would, indeed,
have been rash for him to predict that he would reach
that trial without once failing to toss head; but as
the thing has happened, the odds originally against it
count for nothing. They are disposed of by known
facts. We have said, however, that experience confirms
our theory. It chances that a series of experiments
have been made on coin-tossing. Buffon was
the experimenter, and he tossed thousands of times,
noting always how many times he tossed head running
before tail appeared. In the course of these
trials he many times tossed head nine times running.
Now, if the tossing head nine times running rendered
the chance of tossing a tenth head much less
than usual, it would necessarily follow that in considerably
more than one-half of these instances Buffon
would have failed to toss a tenth head. But he did
not. In about half the cases in which he tossed
nine heads running, the next trial also gave him
head; and about half of these tossings of ten
successive heads were followed by the tossing of an
eleventh head. In the nature of things this was to
be expected.

@

And now let us consider the cognate questions suggested
by our sharpers ideas respecting the person who
plays. This person is to consider carefully whether he
is, and not otherwise to play. He is to be
cool and businesslike, for fortune is invariably adverse
to an angry player. Steinmetz, who appears to place
some degree of reliance on the suggestion that a player
should be in vein, cites in illustration and confirmation
of the rule the following instance from his own
experience-I remember, he says, a curious incident
in my childhood which seems very much to the
point of this axiom. A magnificent gold watch and
chain were given towards the building of a church, and
my mother took three chances, which were at a very
high figure, the watch and chain being valued at more
than One of these chances was entered in my
name, one in my brothers, and a third in my mothers.
I had to throw for her as well as myself. My brother
threw an insignificant figure; for myself I did the
same; but, oddly enough, I refused to throw for my
mother on finding that I had lost my chance, saying
that I should wait a little longer-rather a curious
piece of prudence for a
child of thirteen. The raffle was with three dice; the
majority of the chances had been thrown, and thirty-four
was the highest. I went on throwing the
dice for amusement, and was surprised to find that
every throw was better than the one I had in the raffle.
I thereupon said, Now Ill throw for mamma. I threw
thirty-six, which won the watch! My mother had been
a large subscriber to the building of the church, and
the priest said that my winning the watch for her was
quite According to M. Houdins authority,
however, it seems that I only got into vein-but
how I came to pause and defer throwing the last
chance has always puzzled me respecting this incident
of childhood, which made too great an impression
ever to be effaced.

@

It is probable that most of my readers can recall
some circumstance in their lives, some surprising coincidence,
which has caused a similar impression, and
which they have found it almost impossible to regard
as strictly fortuitous.

@

In chance games especially, curious coincidences
of the sort occur, and lead to the superstitious notion
that they are not mere coincidences, but in some definite
way associated with the fate or fortune of the player, or
else with some event which has previously taken place-a
change of seats, a new deal, or the like. There is
scarcely a gambler who is not prepared to assert his
faith in certain observances whereby, as he believes, a
change of luck may be brought about. In an old work
on card-games the player is gravely advised, if the luck
has been against him, to turn three times round with
his chair, for then the luck will infallibly change in
your favour.

@

Equally superstitious is the notion that anger brings
bad luck, or, as M. Houdins authority puts it, that
the demon of bad luck invariably pursues a passionate
player. At a game of pure chance good temper makes
the player careless under ill-fortune, but it cannot
secure him against it. In like manner, passion may
excite the attention of others to the players losses, and
in any case causes himself to suffer more keenly under
them, but it is only in this sense that passion is unlucky
for him. He is as likely to make a lucky hit
when in a rage as in the calmest mood.

@

It is easy to see how superstitions such as these take
their origin. We can understand that since one who
has been very unlucky in games of pure chance, is not
antecedently likely to continue equally unlucky, a
superstitious observance is not unlikely to be followed
by a seeming change of luck. When this happens the
coincidence is noted and remembered; but failures are
readily forgotten. Again, if the fortunes of a passionate
player be recorded by dispassionate bystanders, he will
not appear to be pursued by worse luck than his neighbours;
but he will be disposed to regard himself as the
victim of unusual ill-fortune. He may perhaps register
a vow to keep his temper in future; and then his luck
may seem to him to improve, even though a careful
record of his gains and losses would show no change
whatever in his fortunes.

@

But it may not seem quite so easy to explain those
undoubted runs of luck by which players in the vein
 have broken gaming-banks, and have
enabled those who have followed their fortunes to
achieve temporary success. The history of the notorious
Garcia, and of others who like him have been for
awhile the favourites of fortune, will occur at once to
many of my readers, and will appear to afford convincing
proof of the theory that the luck of such gamesters
has had a real influence on the fortunes of the
game. The following narrative gives an accurate and
graphic picture of the way in which these bank-breakers
are followed and believed in, while their
success seems to last.

@

The scene is laid in one of the most celebrated
German Kursaals.

@

What a sudden influx of people into the room!
Now, indeed, we shall see a celebrity. The tall light-haired
young man coming towards us, and attended by
such a retinue, is a young Saxon nobleman who made
his appearance here a short time ago, and commenced
his gambling career by staking very small sums; but,
by the most extraordinary luck, he was able to increase
his capital to such an extent that he now rarely stakes
under the maximum, and almost always wins. They
say that when the croupiers see him place his money
on the table, they immediately prepare to pay him,
without waiting to see which colour has actually won,
and that they have offered him a handsome sum down
to desist from playing while he remains here. Crowds
of people stand outside the Kursaal doors every
morning, awaiting his arrival; and when he comes
following him into the room, and staking as he stakes.
When he ceases playing they accompany him to the
door, and shower on him congratulations and thanks
for the good fortune he has brought them. See how
all the people make way for him at the table, and how
deferential are the subdued greetings of his acquaintances!
He does not bring much money with him,
his luck is too great to require it. He takes some
notes out of a case, and places maximums on and
. A crowd of eager hands are immediately outstretched
from all parts of the table, heaping up silver
and gold and notes on the spaces on which he has
staked his money, till there scarcely seems room for
another coin, while the other spaces on the table only
contain a few florins staked by sceptics who refuse to
believe in the counts luck. He wins; and the narrative
proceeds to describe his continued successes, until
he rises from the table a winner of about one hundred
thousand francs at that sitting.

@

The success of Garcia was so remarkable at times as
to affect the value of the shares in the ten or twenty per cent. Nor would it be difficult
to cite many instances which seem to supply incontrovertible
evidence that there is something more than
common chance in the temporary successes of these 
fortunate men.

@

Indeed, to assert merely that in the nature of things
there can be no such thing as luck that can be depended
on even for a short time, would probably be quite
useless. There is only one way of meeting the infatuation
of those who trust in the fates of lucky gamesters.
We can show that, granted a sufficient number of
trials-and it will be remembered that the number of
those who have risked their fortunes at and
 is incalculably great-there must 
be a certain number who appear exceptionally
lucky; or, rather, that the odds are overwhelmingly
against the continuance of play on the scale which
prevails at the foreign gambling-tables, without the
occurrence of several instances of persistent runs of luck.

@

To remove from the question the perplexities resulting
from the nature of the above-named games, let
us suppose that the tossing of a coin is to determine
the success or failure of the player, and that he will
win if he throws head. Now if a player tossed head
twenty times running on any occasion it would be
regarded as a most remarkable run of luck, and it
would not be easy to persuade those who witnessed the
occurrence that the thrower was not in some special
and definite manner the favourite of Fortune. We may
take such exceptional success as corresponding to the
good fortune of a bank-breaker. Yet it is easily
shown that with a number of trials which must fall
enormously short of the number of cases in which
fortune is risked at foreign Kursaals, the throwing of
twenty successive heads would be practically insured.
Suppose every adult person in Britain-say,
persons in all-were to toss a coin, each tossing until
tail was thrown; then it is practically certain that
several among them would toss twenty times before
tail was thrown. Thus It is certain that about five
millions would toss head once; of these about one-half,
or some two millions and a half, would toss head
on the second trial; about a million and a quarter
would toss head on the third trial; about six hundred
thousand on the fourth; some three hundred thousand
on the fifth; and by proceeding in this way-roughly
halving the numbers successively obtained-we find
that some eight or nine of the ten million persons
would be almost certain to toss head twenty times
running. It must be remembered that so long as
the numbers continue large the probability that about
half will toss head at the next trial amounts almost
to certainty. For example, about toss head
sixteen times running now, it is utterly unlikely that
of these, fewer than sixty will toss head yet a
seventeenth time. But if the above process failed on
trial to give even one person who tossed heads
twenty times running-an utterly improbable
event-yet the trial could be made four or five times, with
practical certainty that not one or two, but thirty or
forty, persons would achieve the seemingly incredible
feat of tossing head twenty times running. Nor
would all these thirty or forty persons fail to throw
even three or four more heads.

@

Now, if we consider the immense number of trials
made at gambling-tables, and if we further consider
the gamblers as in a sense typified by our ten millions
of coin-tossers, we shall see that it is not merely
probable but absolutely certain that from time to
time there must be marvellous runs of luck at,
,,, and other games of
chance. Suppose that at the public gaming-tables on
the Continent there sit down each night but one
thousand persons in all, that each person makes but
ten ventures each night, and that there are but one
hundred gambling nights in the year-each supposition
falling far below the truth-there are then one
million ventures each year. It cannot be regarded as
wonderful, then, that among the fifty millions of
ventures made during the last
half century, there should be noted some runs of luck
which on any single trial would seem incredible. On
the contrary, this is so far from being wonderful that
it would be far more wonderful if no such runs of luck
had occurred. It is probable that if the actual number
of ventures, and the circumstances of each, could be
ascertained, and if any mathematician could deal with
the tremendous array of figures in such sort as to
deduce the exact mathematical chance of the occurrence
of bank-breaking runs of luck, it would be found
that the antecedent odds were many millions to one in
favour of the occurrence of a certain number of such
events. In the simpler case of our coin-tossers the
chance of twenty successive heads being tossed can
be quite readily calculated. I have made the calculation,
and I find that if the ten million persons had
each two trials the odds would be more than,
to in favour of the occurrence of twenty successive
heads once at least; and only a million and a half
need have a single trial each, in order to give an even
chance of such an occurrence.

@

But we may learn a further lesson from our illustrative
tossers. We have seen that granted only a
sufficient number of trials, runs of luck are practically
certain to occur but we may also infer that no run of
luck can be to continue. The very principle
which has led us to the conclusion that several of our
tossers would throw twenty heads successively, leads
also to the conclusion that one who has tossed heads
twelve or thirteen times, or any other considerable
number of times in succession, is not more 
likely to toss head on the next trial than at the
beginning., we said, in discussing the
fortunes of the tossers, would toss head at the next
trial in other words, would fail to toss
head. The chances for and against these lucky
tossers are equal at the next trial, precisely as the
chances for and against the least lucky of the ten
million tossers would be equal at any single tossing.

@

Yet, it may be urged, experience shows that luck
continues; for many have won by following the lead
of lucky players. Now I might, at the outset, point
out that this belief in the continuance of luck is
suggested by an idea directly contradictory to that on
which is based the theory of the maturity of the
chances. If the oftener an event has occurred, the
more unlikely is its occurrence at the next trial-the
common belief-then, contrary to the common
belief, the oftener a player has won, the more unlikely is
he to win at the next venture. We cannot separate
the two theories, and assume that the theory of the
maturity of the chances relates to the play, and the
theory of runs of luck to the player. The success of
the player at any trial is as distinctly an event-a
chance event-as the turning up of ace or deuce at the
cast of a die.

@

What then are we to say of the experience of those
who have won money by following a lucky player?
Let us revert to our coin-tossers. Let us suppose that
the progress of the venture in a given county is made
known to a set of betting men in that county; and
that when it becomes known that a person has tossed
head twelve times running, the betting men hasten
to back the luck of that person. Further, suppose this
to happen in every county in England. Now we have
seen that these persons are no more likely to toss a
thirteenth head, than they are to fail. About half
will succeed and about half will fail. Thus about half
their backers will win and about half will lose. But
the successes of the winners will be widely announced;
while the mischances of the losers will be concealed.
This will happen-the like notoriously does happen-for
two reasons. First, gamblers pay little attention
to the misfortunes of their fellows the professed
gambler is utterly selfish, and moreover he hates the
sight of misfortune because it unpleasantly reminds
him of his own risks. Secondly, losing gamblers do
not like their losses to be noised abroad; they object
to having their luck suspected by others, and they are
even disposed to blind themselves to their own ill-fortune
as far as possible. Thus, the inevitable
success of about one-half of our coin-tossers would be
accompanied inevitably by the success of those who
backed their luck, and the successes of such backers
would be bruited abroad and be quoted as examples;
while the failure of those who had backed the other
half, would be
comparatively unnoticed. Unquestionably the like
holds in the case of public gambling-tables. If any
doubt this, let them inquire what has been heard of
those who continued to back Garcia and other bank-breakers.
We know that Garcia and the rest of these
lucky gamblers have been mined; they had risen too
high and were followed too constantly for their fall to
remain unnoticed. But what has been heard of those
unfortunates who backed Garcia after his last successful
evening, and before the change in his luck had been
made manifest? We hear nothing of them, though a
thousand stories are told of those who made money
while Garcia and the rest were in luck.

@

In passing, we may add to these considerations the
circumstance that it is the interest of gaming-bankers
to conceal the misfortunes of the unlucky, and to
announce and exaggerate the success of the fortunate.

@

I by no means question, be it understood, the
possibility that money may be gained quite safely by
gambling. Granting, first, odds such as the banks
have in their favour; secondly, a sufficient capital to
prevent premature collapse; and thirdly, a sufficient
number of customers, success is absolutely certain in
the long run. The capital of the gambling-public doubtless
exceeds collectively the capital of the gambling-banks;
but it is not used collectively the fortunes of
the gambling-public are devoured successively, the
sticks which would be irresistible when combined, are
broken one by one. I leave my readers to judge
whether this circumstance should encourage gambling
or the reverse.

@

I may thus present the position of the gambler
who is not ready to secure Fortune as his ally by
trickery-If he meets gamblers who are not equally
honest, he is not trying his luck against theirs, but
at the best only a part of his
luck against the whole of theirs; if he meets players
as honest as himself, he must nevertheless, as Lord
Holland said to Selwyn, be in earnest and without
irony-en v

@

I gave in my How to Play Whist a case in which a certain man of
title used to offer freely to against the occurrence
of a whist hand containing no card above a nine
-a most unfair wager. Odds of a thousand pounds
to one are very tempting to the inexperienced. I risk
my pound, such a one will say, but no more, and I
may win a thousand. That is the chance; and what
is the certainty? The certainty is that in the long
run such bets will involve a loss of for each
thousand pounds gained, or a net loss of As
certain to all intents as that two and two make four,
a large number of wagers made on this plan would
mean for the clever layer of the odds a very large
gain. Yet Lord Yarborough would probably have
been indignant to a degree if he had been told that in
taking for each hand on which he wagered which
did not prove to be a Yarborough, he was in truth
defrauding the holder of the hand
of
notwithstanding the preliminary agreement, simply because
the preliminary agreement was an unfair one. As to
his being told that even if he had wagered 
against the transaction would have been intrinsically
immoral, doubtless he and his opponent would equally
have scouted the idea.

@

A curious instance of the loss of all sense of honour,
or even honesty, which betting begets, occurred to
me when I was in New Zealand. A bookmaker, as genial and good-natured
a man as one would care to meet, and with a strong
sense of right and justice outside betting, had learned
somehow that ten horses can come in in, different ways. This curious piece
of information seemed to him an admirable way of
gaining money from the inexperienced. So he began
to wager about it, endeavouring-though, as will be
seen, he failed-to win money by wagering on a certainty.
Unfortunately, he came early across a man as
cute as himself and a shade
cuter, who worded the
question on which the wager
turns thus-In how many ways can ten horses be
placed? Of course, this is a very different thing.
Only the first three horses can be placed, and the sets
of three which can be made out of ten horses number
only times times, or . My genial, but not quite honest friend, submitted the matter
to me. Not noticing, at first, the technical use of
the word placed, I told him there were,
different arrangements he rejoiced as though the
money wagered were already in his pocket. When
this was corrected, and I told him his opponent had
certainly won, as the question would be understood by
betting men, he was at first depressed; but presently
recovering, he said, Ah, well; I shall win more out of
this little trick, now I see through it, than I lose this
time.

@

It is well to have some convenient standard of
reference, not only as respects the fairness or unfairness
of betting transactions, but as to the true nature of the
chances involved or supposed to be involved. Many
men bet on horse races without any clear idea of the
chances they are really running. To see that this is so,
it is only necessary to notice the preposterous way in
which many bettors combine their bets. I do not say
that many, even among the idiots who wager on horses
they know nothing about, would lay heavier odds against
the winning of a race by one of two horses than he
would lay against the chance of either horse separately;
but it is quite certain that not one bettor in a hundred
knows either how to combine the odds against two,
three, or more horses, so as to get the odds about the
lot, or how to calculate the chance of double, triple, or
multiple events. Yet these are the very first principles
of betting; and a man who bets without knowing anything
about such matters runs as good a chance of
ultimate success as a man who, without knowing the
country, should take a straight line in the hunting-field.

@

Now, apart from what may be called roguery in
horse-racing, every bet in a race may be brought into
direct comparison with the simple and easily understood
chance of success in a lottery where there is a single
prize, and therefore only one prize ticket and the
chance of the winner of a race, where several horses
run, being one particular horse, or one of any two, three,
or more horses, can always be compared with the easily
understood chance of drawing a ball of one colour out
of a vase containing so many balls of that colour and so
many of another. So also can the chance of a double
or triple event be compared with a chance of the second
kind.

@

Let us first, then, take the case of a simple lottery,
and distinguish between a fair lottery and an unfair
one. Every actual lottery, I remark in passing, is an
unfair one; at least. I have never yet heard of a fair
one, and I can imagine no possible case in which it
would be worth anyones while to start a fair lottery.

@

Suppose ten persons each contribute a sovereign to
form a prize of; and that each of the ten is allowed
to draw one ticket from among ten, one marked ticket
giving the drawer the prize. That is a fair lottery;
each person has paid the right price for his chance.
The proof is, that if anyone buys up all the chances at
the price, thus securing the certainty of drawing the
marked ticket, he obtains as a prize precisely the sum
he has expended.

@

This, I may remark, is the essential condition for a
fair lottery, whatever the number of prizes; though we
have no occasion to consider here any case except the
very simple case of a one-prize lottery. Where there
are several prizes, whether equal or unequal in value,
we have only to add their value together the price for
all the tickets together must equal the sum we thus
obtain. For instance, if the ten persons in our illustrative
case, instead of marking one ticket were to mark
three, for prizes worth, and, the lottery would
be equally fair. Anyone, by buying up all the ten
tickets, would be sure of all three prizes, that is, he
would pay ten pounds and get ten pounds-a fair
bargain.

@

But suppose, reverting to one-prize lotteries, that
the drawer of the marked ticket were to receive only
instead of as a prize. Then clearly the lottery
would be unfair. The test is, that a man must pay
to insure the certainty of winning the prize of, and
will then be out of pocket. So of all such cases.
When the prize, if there is but one, or the sum of all
the prizes together, if there are several, falls short of the
price of all the tickets together, the lottery is an unfair
one. The sale of each ticket is a swindle; the total
amount of which the ticket-purchasers are swindled
being the sum by which the value of the prize or prizes
falls short of the price of the tickets.

@

We see at once that a number of persons in a room
together would never allow an unfair lottery of this sort.
If each of the ten persons put a sovereign into the pool,
each having a ticket, the drawer of the prize ticket
would be clearly entitled to the pool. If one of the ten
started the lottery, and if when the, including his
own, has been paid in to the pool, he proposed to take
charge of the pool, and to pay to the drawer of the
marked ticket, it would be rather too obvious that he
was putting in his pocket. But lotteries are not
conducted in this simple way, or so that the swindle
becomes obvious to all engaged. As a matter of fact,
all lotteries are so arranged that the manager or managers
of the lottery put a portion of the proceeds 
into their pockets. Otherwise it would not be worth
while to start a lottery. Whether a lottery is started
by a nation, or for a cause, or for personal profit, it
always is intended for profit; and profit is always
secured, and indeed can only be secured, by making
the total value of the prizes fall short of the sum received
for the tickets.

@

I would not be understood to say that I regard all
unfair lotteries as swindles. In the case of lotteries for
a charitable purpose I suppose the object is to add
gambling excitement to the satisfaction derived from
the exercise of charity. The unfairness is understood
and permitted; just as, at a fancy fair, excessive prices
are charged, change is not returned, and other pleasantries
are permitted which would be swindles if practised in
real trading. But in passing I may note that even
lotteries of this kind are objectionable. Those who
arrange them have no wish to gain money for themselves;
and many who buy tickets have no wish to win
prizes, and would probably either return any prize they
might gain or pay its full value. But it is not so with
all who buy tickets; and even a charitable purpose will
not justify the mischief done by the encouragement of
the gambling spirit of such persons. In nearly all cases
the money gained by such lotteries might, with a little
more trouble but at less real cost, be obtained directly
from the charitably minded members of the community.

@

To return, however, to my subject.

@

I have supposed the case of ten persons gambling
fairly in such a way that each venture made by the ten
results in a single-prize lottery. But as we know, a
betting transaction is nearly always arranged between
two persons only. I will therefore now suppose only
two persons to arrange such a lottery, in this way-The
prize is, as before, and there are ten tickets;
one of the players, A, puts, say, in the pool, while
the other, B, puts; three tickets are marked as
winning tickets; A then draws at random once only;
if he draws a marked ticket, he wins the pool; if he
draws an unmarked ticket, B takes the pool. This is
clearly fair; in fact it is only a modification of the
preceding case. A takes the chances of three of the
former players, while B takes the chances of the remaining
seven. True, there seems to be a distinction.
If we divided the former ten players into two sets, one
of three, the other of seven, there would not be a single
drawing to determine whether the prize should go to
the three or to the seven; each of the ten would draw
a ticket, all the tickets being thus drawn. Yet in
reality the methods are in principle precisely the same.
When the ten men have drawn their tickets in the
former method, three tickets have been assigned at
random to the three men and seven tickets to the other
seven; and the chance that the three have won is the
chance that one of the three tickets is the marked one.
In the latter method there are ten tickets, of which
three are marked; and the chance that A wins the
prize is the chance that at his single drawing he takes
one of the three marked tickets. But obviously the
chance that a certain marked ticket in ten is one of the
three taken at random must be exactly the same as the
chance that a certain ticket taken at random from
among the ten is one of three marked tickets; for each
of these chances is clearly three times as good as the
chance of drawing, at a single trial, one particular ticket
out of ten.

@

It will be found that we can now test any wager,
not merely determining whether it is fair or unfair, but
the extent to which it is so, if only the actual chance of
the horse or horses concerned is supposed to be known.
Unfortunately, in the great majority of cases bets are
unfair in another way than that which we are for the
moment considering, the odds not only differing from
those fairly representing the chances of the horse or
horses concerned, but one party to the wager having
better knowledge than the other what those chances
are. Cases of this kind will be considered further on.

@

Suppose that the just odds against a horse in a race
are to By this I mean that so far as the two
bettors are concerned, it is nine times more
likely that the horse will not win the race than that he
will. Now, it is nine times more likely that a particular
ticket among ten will not be drawn at a single trial
than that it will. So the chance of this horse is correctly
represented by the chance of the prize ticket
being drawn in a lottery where there are ten tickets in
all. If two persons arrange such a lottery, and A pays
in to the pool, while the other, B, pays in, making
. in all, A gets a fair return for his money in a single
drawing, one ticket out of the ten being marked for the
prize. A represents, then, the backer of the horse who
risks; B the layer of the odds who risks The
sum of the stakes is the prize, or If A risks less
than, while B risks, the total prize is diminished;
or if, while A risks, B risks less than, the total
is diminished. In either case the wrong done to the
other bettor amounts precisely to the amount by which
the total is diminished. If, for instance, A only wagered
. against Bs, the case is exactly the same as
though A and B having severally contributed and
. to a pool, one ticket out of ten having been marked
and A to have one chance only of drawing it, A abstracted two
shillings from the pool. If B only wagered instead
of against As the case would be just the same
as though, after the pool had been made up as just described,
B had abstracted

@

Take another case. The odds are to against a
horse. The chance of its winning is the same as that
of drawing a marked ticket out of a bag containing ten,
when three are marked and seven are unmarked. We
know that in this case two players, A and B, forming
the lottery, must severally contribute and to the
pool, and if on a single drawing one of the three marked
tickets appears, then A wins the pool, or, whereas
B takes it if one of the seven unmarked tickets is drawn.
If the backer of the horse, instead of wagering,
wagered only against, he would be precisely in
the position of a player A, who, having paid in his
to the pool of in all, should abstract a pound therefrom.
If the layer of the odds wagered only against
 he would be in the position of a player B, who,
having paid in his to the pool of in all, should
abstract therefrom.

@

Or, if any difficulty should arise in the readers
mind from this way of presenting matters, let him put
the case thus-Suppose the sum of the stakes;
then the odds being to against, the case is as though
three tickets were marked for the prize and seven unmarked;
and the two players ought therefore to contribute
severally and to make up the If the
. is made up in any other way, there is unfairness;
one player puts in too much, the other puts in too
little. If one puts in instead of, the other
puts in instead of, and manifestly the former
has wronged the latter to the extent of, having
failed to put in which he ought to have put in,
and having got the other to put in which ought
not to have been put in. This seems clearer, I find, to
some than the other way of presenting the matter.
But as, in reality, bets are not made in this way, the
other way, which in principle is the same, is more convenient.
Bettors do not take a certain sum of money
for the total of their stakes, and agree how much each
shall stake towards that sum; but they bet a certain
sum against some other sum. It is easy to take either
of these to find out how much to be staked against
it, and thus to ascertain to what extent the proper total
of the stakes has been affected either in excess or defect.
And we can get rid of any difficulty arising from the
fact that according to the side we begin from we get
either an excess or a defect, by beginning always from
the side of the one who wagers at least as much as he
should do, at the proper odds, whatever they may be.

@

As a general rule, indeed, the matter is a good deal
simplified by the circumstance that fraudulent bettors
nearly always lay the odds. It is easy to see why. In
fact, one of the illustrative cases above considered has
already probably suggested the reason to the reader.
I showed that when the odds are to and only to 
is laid, in pounds, the fraud is the same as removing
from a pool of; whereas with the same odds,
backing the horse by instead of, corresponded
to removing two shillings from such a pool. Now, if
a fraudulent gambler had a ready hand in abstracting
coins from a pool, and were playing with some one who
did not count the money handed over to him when he
won, it would clearly be the same thing to him whether
he contributed the larger or smaller sum to the pool, for
he would abstract as many coins as he could, and it
would be so much clear gain. But if he could not get
at the pool, and therefore could only cheat by omitting
to contribute his fair share, it would manifestly be far
better for him to be the buyer of the larger share of the
chances. If he bought nine tickets out of ten, he
might put in, pretending to put in, and pocket
. whereas if he only bought one ticket, he could only
defraud his companion by a few shillings out of the
price of that ticket. Now, this is the hardship under
which the fraudulent bettor labours. He cannot, at
least he cannot generally, get at the stakes themselves
or, which comes to the same thing, he must pay up
in full when he loses, otherwise he has soon to give up
his profitable trade. Of course he may levant without
paying, but this is only to be adopted as a last resource;
and fraudulent betting is too steadily remunerative to
be given up for the value of a single robbery of the
simpler kind. Thus the bettor naturally prefers laying
the odds. He can keep so much more out of the larger
sum which ought to be laid against a horse than he
could out of the smaller sum with which the horse
should be backed.

@

Then there is another circumstance which still more
strongly encourages the fraudulent bettor to lay the
odds. It is much easier for him to get his victims to
back a horse than to bet against one. In the first
place, the foolish folk who expect to make a fortune by
betting, take fancies for a particular horse, while they
are not so apt to take fancies against any particular
horse. But secondly, and this is the chief reason of
their mode of betting, they want to make a great and
sudden gain at a small risk. They have not time, for
the most part, to make many wagers on any given race;
and to wager large sums against two or three horses
would involve a great risk for a small profit. This,
then, they do not care to do; preferring to back some
particular horse, or perhaps two or three, by which they
risk a comparatively small sum, and may win a large
one. As Mr. Plyant truly remarks in Hawley Smarts
Bound to Win, The public is dramatic in its fancies;
the public has always a dream of winning a thousand
to ten if it can raise the tenner. The public, Mr.
Laceby, knows nothing about racing, but as a rule is
wonderfully up in the story of Theodores winning the
Leger, after a hundred pounds to a walking-stick had
been laid against him. The public is always putting
down its walking-stick and taking to crutches in consequence....
What the public will back at the lists
the last few days before the Derby would astonish you
theyve dreams, and tips, and fancies about the fifty to
one lot you couldnt imagine. Is it to be wondered at
that the public finds its tastes in this respect humoured
by the bookmakers, when we remember that it is from
just such wagers as the public like to make that the
bookmaker can most readily obtain the largest slice of
profit?

@

But we must not fall into the mistake of supposing
that all the foolish folk who back horses at long odds
necessarily lose. On the contrary, many of them win
money-unfortunately for others, and often for themselves.
It would be a very foolish thing to pay for
one of ten tickets in a lottery where the single prize
was only worth Yet some of the foolish fellows
who did this must win the prize, gaining by the
venture. If many others were encouraged to repeat
such a venture, or if he repeated it himself,
they and he would have reason to repent. He might,
indeed, be lucky yet again; and perhaps more than
once. But the more he won in that way, the more he
would trust in his good luck; and in the long run he
would be sure to lose, if all his ventures were of the
same foolish kind as the first.

@

We see, however, that the foolish bettor in any
given case is by no means certain to lose. Nor is
the crafty bettor who takes advantage of him at all
sure to win. A man might steal or from the
pool, after making up out of the, in the
case I have imagined, and yet lose, because his opponent
might be fortunate enough to draw the single
marked ticket, and so win the or left in the
pool.

@

In reality, however, though quite possibly some
among the foolish bettors not only win money but
even keep what they win, refraining from trying their
luck afresh, it must not be supposed that the fraudulent
bettor exposes himself to the risk of loss in the long
run. He plays a safe game. Every one of his bets is
a partial swindle; yet in each he runs the risk of loss.
His entire series of bets is a complete swindle, in which
he runs no risk whatever of loss, but insures a certain
gain. Let us see how this is done.

@

Suppose there are two horses in a race, A and B,
and that the betting is to against B. In other words,
the chance of A winning is as the chance of drawing a
marked ticket out of a bag containing four tickets of
which three are marked, while Bs chance of winning is
as that of drawing the single unmarked ticket. In this
case, as the odds are in favour of one horse, our bookmaker
will have to do a little backing, which, preferably,
he would avoid. In fact, a race such as this, that is, a
match between two horses, is not altogether to the
bookmakers taste; and what he would probably do in
this case would be to obtain special information in some
underhand way about the horses, and bet accordingly.
Supposing, however, that he cannot do this, poor
fellow, let us see how he is to proceed to insure profit.
The first thing is to decide on some amount which shall
be staked over each horse; and the theoretically exact
way-the mathematical manner-of swindling would
be as follows-Suppose that with some person a wager
were made at the just odds in favour of A, in such sort
that the stakes on both sides amounted, let us say, to
 the fair wager would be to that A
will win; our swindler, however, having found some
greenhorn X, whom he can persuade to take smaller
odds, takes his book and writes down quickly to
. in favour of A. He now finds some other greenhorn,
Y, who is very anxious to back A, and having
duly bewailed his misfortune in having no choice but
to lay against a horse who is-so he says-almost
certain to win, he asks and obtains the odds of
to in favour of A; that is to say, he wagers
to. If B wins, he pays
.

@

The system by which bookmakers win has great
advantages over the plan formerly adopted at public
gaming-houses, and probably adopted still, though less
publicly. At the gaming-house the bankers did run
some little risk. They were bound to win in the long
run; but they might lose for a night or two, or might
even have a tolerably long run of bad luck. But a
judicious bookmaker can make sure of winning money
on every great race. Of course, if the bookmakers like
a little excitement-and they are men, after all, though
they do make their own providence-they can venture
a little more than the nothing they usually venture.
For instance, instead of laying the odds against all the
horses, they can lay against all but one, and back that
one heavily. Then, if that horse wins, they skin the
lamb, in the pleasing language of their tribe. But the
true path to success is that which I have indicated
above, and they know it .

@

Still, in every depth there is a deeper still. In the
cases hitherto considered I have supposed that the
chances of a horse really are what the public odds
indicate. If they are not, it might be supposed that
only the owner of the horse and a few friends, besides
the trainer, jockey, and one or two other,
would know of this. But, as a matter of fact, the
bookmakers generally find out tolerably soon if anything
is wrong with a horse, or if he has had a very
good trial and has a better chance of winning than had
till then been supposed. Before very long this knowledge
produces its effect in bringing the horse to its true
price, or near it. In the former case the horse is very
diligently pencilled by the bookmakers, and recedes
step by step in the betting, till he is either at long odds
or is no longer backed at any price. In the latter, the
horse is as diligently backed, till he has reached short
odds, taking his place among the favourites, or perhaps
as first favourite.

@

But in either process-that of driving a horse to long
odds, or that of installing him in a position among the
favourites, according to the circumstances-a great deal
of money is made and lost-made by those who know
what has really happened, lost by those who do not.
We may be tolerably sure it is not the public which
gains. It is to the professional, naturally, that the
information comes first, and he makes a handsome profit
out of it, before the change in the betting shows the
public what has happened.

@

Now here, unfortunately, we touch on a part of our
subject which affects men who are not, in a proper sense
of the word, bookmakers. It is a singular
circumstance-or rather it is not at all singular, but accords
with multiplied experiences, showing how the moral
nature gets warped by gambling transactions-that
men who are regarded by the world, and regard themselves,
as gentlemen, seem to recognise nothing dishonourable
in laying wagers which they not to
accord with the real chances of a horse. A man who
would scorn to note the accidental marks on the backs
of playing cards, and still more to make such marks,
will yet avail himself of knowledge just as unfair in
horse-racing as a knowledge of the backs of certain
cards would be in whist or if Coriander wins
the Two Thousand, and just quits if he loses; not a
bad book, Grenville! To which Grenville, nothing
loth, responds, By Jove! no. Yet every wager by
which this result has been obtained, if rightly considered,
was as certainly a fraud as a wager laid upon a
throw with cogged dice. For, what makes wagers on
such throws unfair, except the knowledge that with such
dice a certain result is more likely than any other? and
what essential difference is there between such knowledge
about dice and special knowledge about a horses chance
in a race? The doctrine may not be pleasant to sporting
gentlemen who have not considered the matter, but once
duly considered there cannot be a doubt as to its truth
a wager made with an opponent who does not possess
equally accurate information about the chances involved,
is not a fair wager but a fraud. It is a fraud of the same
kind as that committed by a man who wagers after the
race, knowing what the event of the race has been; and
it only differs from such a fraud in degree in the same
sense that robbing a till differs from robbing a bank.

@

It may be argued that by the same reasoning good
whist players defraud inferior players who play with
them for equal stakes. But the cases are altogether
different. Good whist players do not conceal their
strength. Their skill is known; and if inferior players
choose to play on equal terms, trusting in good luck to
befriend them, they do it at their own risk. If a
parallel is to be sought from the whist-table, it would
be rather derived from the case of two players who
had privately arranged a system of signalling; for in
such a case there is knowledge on one side which is not
only wanting on the other side, but of the possession of
which the other partners have no suspicion. No one would
hesitate to call that swindling. Now take the case of
one who knows that, as the result of a certain trial, a
horse which is the favourite in a great race will take
part in it, indeed, but will only do so to make running
for a better horse. Until the time when the owner of
the horses declares to win with the latter, such knowledge
enables its possessor to accept safely all wagers in
favour of the horse; and he knows perfectly well, of
course, that not one such wager is offered him except
by persons ignorant of the true state of the case. Even
if such offers are made by bookmakers, whose profession
is swindling, and though we may not have a particle of
sympathy with such men when they lose in this way,
the acceptance of such wagers is in no sense justified.
Two wrongs do not, in this case more than in any other
make a right.

@

I have said that in every depth there is a deeper
still. In the subject I am dealing with there is a deepest
depth of all. I will not, however, sully these pages
with the consideration of the foulest of the rascalities
to which horse-racing has led. Simply to show those
who bet on horse-races how many risks of loss they expose
themselves to, I mention that some owners of horses
have been known to bring about the defeat of their own
horse, on which the foolish betting public had wagered
large sums, portions of which find their way into the
pockets of the dishonest owners aforementioned. I
may add that, according to an old proverb, there are
more ways of killing a cat than by choking it with
cream. A horse may be most effectually prevented from
winning without any such vulgar devices as pulling,
roping, and so forth. So also a horse, whose owner is
honest, may be got at after other fashions than have
been noted yet, either in the police courts or in sporting
novels.

@

Let us turn, however, from these unsavoury details,
and consider briefly the objections which exist against
gambling, even in the case of cash transactions so conducted
that no unfair advantage is taken on either
side.

@

The object of all gambling transactions is to win
without the trouble of earning. I apprehend that nearly
every one who wagers money on a horse race has, for
some reason or other, faith in his own good fortune.
It is a somewhat delicate question to determine how far
such faith makes gambling unfair. For if, on the one
hand, we must admit that a really lucky man could not
fairly gamble against others not so lucky, yet, as it is
absolutely certain in the scientific sense that no such
thing as exists, it is
difficult to say how far faith in a non-existent quality
can be held to make that fraudulent which would certainly
be fraudulent did the quality exist. Possibly if a
man, A, before laying a wager with another, B, were to
say, I have won nearly every bet I have made, B might
decline to encounter A in any wager. In the case of a
man who had been so lucky as A, it is quite probable
that, supposing a wager made with B and won by A, B
would think he had been wronged if A afterwards told
him of former successes. B might say, You should
have told me that before I wagered with you; it is not
fair to offer wagers where you know you have a better
chance of winning than your opponents. And though
B would, strictly speaking, be altogether wrong, he
would be reasoning correctly from his incorrect assumption,
and A would be unable to contradict him.

@

If we were to assume that every man who wagered
because he had faith in his own good luck was guilty of
a moral though not of a logical or legal wrong, we
should have to regard ninety-nine gamblers out of a
hundred as wrong-doers. Let it suffice to point out that,
whether believing in his luck or not, the gambler is
blameworthy, since his desire is to obtain the property
of another without giving an equivalent. The interchange
of property is of advantage to society; because,
if the interchange is a fair one, both parties to the transaction
are gainers. Each exchanges something which
is of less use to him for something which is of more use.
This is equally the case whether there is a direct exchange
of objects of value, or one of the parties to the
exchange gives the other the benefit of his labour or of
his skill acquired by labour. But in gambling, as
where one man robs another, the case is otherwise.
One person has lost what he can perhaps ill spare, while
the other has obtained what he has, strictly speaking,
no right to, and what is almost certainly of less value
to him than to the person who has lost it. Or, as
Herbert Spencer concisely presents the case-Benefit
received does not imply effort put forth, and the happiness
of the winner involves the misery of the loser this
kind of action is therefore essentially anti-social; it sears
the sympathies, cultivates a hard egoism, and so produces
a general deterioration of character and conduct.

@



@

When I was travelling in Australasia, I saw a good
deal of a class of men with whom, in this country,
only betting men are likely to come much in contact-bookmakers,
or men who make a profession of betting.
What struck me most, perhaps, at first was
that they regarded their business as a distinct profession.
Just as a man would say in England, I am
a lawyer or a doctor, so these men would say that they
were bookmakers. Yet, on consideration, I saw that
there was nothing altogether novel in this. Others,
whose business really is to gain money by making
use of the weaknesses of their fellow-men, have not
scrupled to call their employment a trade or a profession.
Madame Rachel might have even raised her
special occupation to the dignity of a mystery on
Shakespearean grounds ; and if
aught of wrong in his employment could be made out
to the satisfaction of a bookmaker, his answer might be
Shakespearean also, Other sorts offend as well as we-ay,
and better dishonourable; and probably his
claim is just.

@

To turn, however, to betting on horse-races as actually
conducted.

@

There appears every day in the newspapers an
account of the betting on the principal forthcoming
races. The betting on such races as the Two Thousand
Guineas, the Derby, and the Oaks, often begins more
than a year before the races are run; and during the
interval, the odds laid against the different horses
engaged in them vary repeatedly, in accordance with
the reported progress of the animals in their training,
or with what is learned respecting the intentions of
their owners. Many who do not bet themselves find
an interest in watching the varying fortunes of the
horses which are held by the initiated to be leading
favourites, or to fall into the second rank, or merely to
have an outside chance of success. It is amusing to
notice, too, how frequently the final state of the odds is
falsified by the event; how some rank outsider will
run into the first place, while the leading favourites are
not even placed.

@

It is in reality a simple matter to understand the
betting on races, yet it is
astonishing how seldom those who do not actually bet
upon races have any inkling of the meaning of those
mysterious columns which indicate the opinion of the
betting world respecting the probable results of approaching
contests, equine or otherwise.

@

Let us take a few simple cases of odds, to begin
with; and, having mastered the elements of our subject,
proceed to see how cases of greater complexity are to be
dealt with.

@

Suppose the newspapers inform us that the betting
is to against a certain horse for such and such a
race, what inference are we to deduce? To learn this,
let us conceive a case in which the odds against a
certain event are as to Suppose there are three
balls in a bag, one being white, the others black. Then,
if we draw a ball at random, it is clear that we are
twice as likely to draw a black as to draw a white ball.
This is technically expressed by saying that the odds
are to drawing a white ball; or to 
 drawing a black ball. This
being understood, it follows that, when the odds are
said to be to against a certain horse, we are to infer
that, in the opinion of those who have studied the performance
of the horse, and compared it with that of
the other horses engaged in the race, his chance of
winning is equivalent to the chance of drawing one
particular ball out of a bag of three balls.

@

Observe how this result is obtained the odds are 
to, and the chance of the horse is as that of drawing
one ball out of a bag of three-three being the sum of
the two numbers and This is the method followed
in all such cases. Thus, if the odds against a horse
are to, we infer that the consider his
chance equal to that of drawing one particular ball out
of a bag of

@

A similar treatment applies when the odds are not
given as so many to one. Thus, if the odds against a
horse are as to, we infer that the horses chance is
equal to that of drawing a white ball out of a bag
containing five black and two white balls-or seven in
all.

@

We must notice also that the number of balls may
be increased to any extent, provided the proportion
between the total number and the number of a specified
colour remains unchanged. Thus, if the odds are to 
against a horse, his chance is assumed to be equivalent
to that of drawing white ball out of a bag containing
six balls, only one of which is white; to that of
drawing a white ball out of a bag containing sixty balls,
of which ten are white-and so on. This is a very
important principle, as we shall now see.

@

Suppose there are two horses 
engaged in a race, and that the odds are to against
one, and to against the other-what are the odds
that one of the two horses will win the race? This
case will doubtless remind my readers of an amusing
sketch by Leech, called-if I remember rightly-Signs
of the Commission. Three or four undergraduates are
at a wine, discussing matters equine. One propounds
to his neighbour the following question-I say, Charley,
if the odds are to against, and to 
against, whats the betting about the
pair?-Dont know, Im sure, replies Charley, but
Ill give you to against them. The absurdity of
the reply is, of course, very obvious; we see at once
that the odds cannot be heavier against a pair of
horses than against either singly. Still, there are
many who would not find it easy to give a correct reply
to the question. What has been said above, however,
will enable us at once to determine the just odds in
this or any similar case. Thus-the odds against one
horse being to, his chance of winning is equal to
that of drawing one white ball out of a bag of,
one only of which is white. In like manner, the
chance of the second horse is equal to that of drawing
one white ball out of a bag of, one only of which is
white. Now we have to find a number which is a
multiple of both the numbers three and five. Fifteen
is such a number. The chance of the first horse, modified
according to the principle explained above, is equal
to that of drawing a white ball out of a bag of fifteen
of which are white. In like manner, the chance of
the second is equal to that of drawing a white ball out
of a bag of fifteen of which are white. Therefore
the chance that will win is equal to that
of drawing a white ball out of a bag of fifteen balls, of
which are white. There
remain black balls, and therefore the odds are to the pair.

@

To impress the method of treating such cases on the
mind of the reader, let us take the betting about three
horses-say to, to, and to the three
horses respectively. Then their respective chances
are equal to the chance of drawing one white ball
out of, one only of which is white; a white
ball out of, of which two only are white; and 
one white ball out of, one only of which is white.
The least number which contains four, nine, and ten is
; and the above chances, modified according to the
principle explained above, become equal to the chance
of drawing a white ball out of a bag containing balls,
when,, and are white. Therefore,
the chance that one of the three will win is equal
to that of drawing a white ball out of a bag containing
 balls, of which 
are white. Therefore, the odds are to the
three.

@

One does not hear in practice of such odds as 
to But betting-men manage to run very near the truth.
For instance, in such a case as the above, the odds on
the three would probably be given as to -that is,
instead of to, the published
odds would be equivalent to this.

@

And here a certain nicety in betting has to be mentioned.
In running the eye down the list of odds, one
will often meet such expressions as to against
such a horse, or to Now, the
odds of to may be understood to imply that
the horses chance is equivalent to that of drawing a
certain ball out of a bag of eleven. But if the odds
are offered and not taken, we cannot infer this. The
offering of the odds implies that the horses chance is
 than that above mentioned, but the fact that
they are not taken implies that the horses chance is
. If no higher odds are offered against the
horse, we may infer that his chance is 
than that mentioned above. Similarly, if the odds of
 to are, we infer that the horses chance
is than that of drawing one ball out of eleven;
if the odds are not obtained, we infer that his chance is;
and if no lower odds are asked for, we infer that
his chance is

@

Thus, there might be horses 
against whom the nominal odds were to, and yet
these horses might not be equally good favourites,
because the odds might not be taken, or might be
asked for in vain. We might accordingly find three
such horses arranged thus

@

Or these different stages might mark the upward or
downward progress of the same horse in the betting.
In fact, there are yet more delicate gradations, marked
by such expressions respecting certain odds.

@

This table is interpreted thus bettors are willing to
lay the same odds against as would be the
true mathematical odds against drawing a white ball
out of a bag containing two white and seven black
balls; but no one is willing to back the horse at this
rate. On the other hand, higher odds are not offered
against him. Hence it is presumable that his chance
is but slightly less than that above indicated. Again,
bettors are willing to lay the same odds against 
as might fairly be laid against drawing one white ball
out of a bag of seven, one only of which is white; but
backers of the horse consider that they ought to get
the same odds as might be fairly laid against drawing
the white ball when an additional black ball had been
put into the bag. As respects and, bettors are willing to lay the odds which there
would be, respectively, against drawing a white ball
out of a bag containing- eleven balls, one only of
which is white, and one hundred and seven balls,
seven only of which are white. Now, the three horses,
,, and, all belong
to Sir Joseph Hawley, so that the odds about the
three are referred to in the last statement of the list
just given. And since none of the offers against the
three horses have been taken, we may expect the odds
actually taken about Sir Joseph Hawleys lot to be
more favourable than those obtained by summing
up the three former in the manner we have already
examined. It will be found that the resulting odds
 against Sir J. Hawleys lot-estimated in
this way-should be, as nearly as possible, to
We find, however, that the odds are to
Hence, we learn that the offers against some or all of
the three horses are considerably short of what backers
require; or else that some person has been induced
to offer far heavier odds against Sir J. Hawleys lot
than are justified by the fair odds against his horses,
severally.

@

I have heard it asked why a horse is said to be a
favourite, though the odds may be against him. This
is very easily explained. Let us take as an illustration
the case of a race in which four horses are engaged to
run. If all these horses had an equal chance of winning,
it is very clear that the case would correspond to
that of a bag containing four balls of different colours;
since, in this case, we should have an equal chance of
drawing a ball of any assigned colour. Now, the odds
against drawing a particular ball would clearly be to
. This, then, should be the betting against each of
the three horses. If any one of the horses has less odds
offered against him, he is a There may be
more than one of the four horses thus distinguished;
and, in that case, the horse against which the least
odds are offered is Let us suppose
there are two favourites, and that the odds against the
leading favourite are to, those against the other 
to, and those against the best non-favourite to ;
and let us compare the chances of the four horses. I
have not named any odds against the fourth, because, if
the odds against all the horses but one are given, the
just odds against that one are determinable, as we shall
see immediately. The chance of the leading favourite
corresponds to the chance of drawing a ball out of a bag
in which are three black and two white balls, in all;
that of the next to the chance of drawing a ball out of a
bag in which are two black and one white ball, in
all; that of the third, to the chance of drawing a ball
out of a bag in which are four black balls and one white
one, in all. We take, then, the least number containing
both five and three-that is, ; and then
the number of white balls corresponding to the chances
of the three horses are respectively six, five, and three,
or fourteen in all; leaving only to represent the
chance of the fourth horse . Hence the chances of the four
horses are respectively as the numbers,,,
and

@

I have spoken above of the published odds. The
statements made in the daily papers commonly refer to
wagers actually made, and therefore the uninitiated
might suppose that everyone who tried would be able
to obtain the same odds. This is not the case. The
wagers which are laid between practised betting-men
afford very little indication of the prices which would be
forced upon an inexperienced bettor.
Bookmakers-that is, men who make a series of bets
upon several or all of the horses engaged in a race-naturally
seek to give less favourable terms than the
known chances of the different horses engaged would
suffice to warrant. As they cannot offer such terms to the
initiated, they offer them-and in general successfully-to
the inexperienced.

@

It is often said that a man may so lay his wagers
about a race as to make sure of gaining money whichever
horse wins the race. This is not strictly the case.
It is of course possible to make sure of winning if the
bettor can only get persons to lay or take the But this is precisely
the problem which would remain insoluble if all bettors
were equally experienced.

@

Suppose, for instance, that there are three horses
engaged in a race with equal chances of success. It is
readily shown that the odds are to against each.
But if a bettor can get a person to take even betting
against the first horse, a second person to do the
like about the second horse, and a third to do the
like about the third horse, and if all these bets are
made to the same amount-say -then, inasmuch
as only one horse can win, the bettor loses 
on that horse, and gains the same sum
on each of the two horses B and C. Thus, on the
whole, he gains the sum laid out against each
horse.

@

If the layer of the odds had laid the true odds to the
same amount on each horse, he would neither have
gained nor lost. Suppose, for instance, that he laid
 to against each horse, and A won; then
he would have to pay to the backer of A, and to
receive from each of the backers of B and C.
In like manner, a person who had backed each horse
to the same extent would neither lose nor gain by the
event. Nor would a backer or layer who had wagered
 sums gain or lose by the race; he
would gain or lose This will at
once be seen, on trial.

@

Let us next take the case of horses with unequal
prospects of success-for instance, take the case of the
four horses considered above, against which the odds
were respectively to, to, to, and to
Here, suppose the same sum laid against each, and for
convenience let this sum be . The layer of the odds
wagers to against the leading favourite, to
. against the second horse, to against the
third, and to against the fourth. Whichever
horse wins, the layer has to pay; but if the
favourite wins, he receives only on one horse,
on another, and on the third-that is in all, so
that he loses; if the second horse wins, he has to
receive, and-or in all, so that he
loses; if the third horse wins, he receives,
and-or in all, and thus gains; and lastly,
if the fourth horse wins, he has to receive, and
.-or in all, so that he gains He clearly
risks much less than he has a chance 
of gaining. It is also clear that in all such cases the
worst event for the layer of the odds is that the
first favourite should win. Accordingly, as professional
bookmakers are nearly always layers of odds, one
often finds the success of a favourite spoken of in the
papers as a great blow for the bookmakers, while the
success of a rank outsider will be described as a misfortune
to backers.

@

But there is another circumstance which tends to
make the success of a favourite a blow to layers of the
odds and In the case we have supposed,
the money actually pending about the four horses
 was as respects the favourite, as
respects the second, as respects the third, and
. as respects the fourth. But, as a matter of fact,
the amounts pending about the favourites bear always
a much greater proportion than the above to the
amounts pending about outsiders. It is easy to see the
effect of this. Suppose, for instance, that instead of
the sums to, to, to, and
to, a bookmaker had laid to to
 to, and to, respectively-then
it will easily be seen that he will lose by
the success of the favourite; whereas he would gain
 by the success of the second horse, by
that of the third, and by that of the fourth.
I have taken this as an extreme case; as a general
rule, there is not so great a disparity as has been here
assumed between the sums pending on favourites and
outsiders.

@

Finally, it may be asked whether, in the case of
horses having unequal chances, it is possible that wagers
can be so proportioned that, as in the former case, a person backing or
laying against all the four shall neither gain nor lose.
It is so. All that is necessary is, that the sum actually
pending about each horse shall be the same. Thus, in
the preceding case, if the wagers to, to,
. to, and to, are either laid or taken by
the same person, he will neither gain nor lose by the
event, whatever it may be. And therefore if unfair
odds are laid or taken about all the horses, in such a
manner that the amounts pending on the several horses
are equal, the unfair bettor must win by
the result. Say, for instance, that instead of the above
odds, he lays to, to, to, and to
. against the four horses respectively; it will be found
that he win Or if he the odds to
 to, to, and to, he will win by the race. So
that, by giving or taking such odds to a sufficiently
large amount, a bettor would be certain of pocketing
a considerable sum, whatever the event of a given race
might be.

@

It is by no means necessary that the system I have
described above should be carried out in a precise and
formal manner. If you have a tolerably large capital,
or if, in case of failure, you have courage to run away, you may leave a little to chance
on every race, and then, if chance favours you, your
gains will be proportionately greater.

@

But for supreme success on the turf, wider measures
must be adopted, which may now be sketched in outline.
The system is exceedingly simple-and it will
be found that when the method of the great bookmakers
is analysed a little, there underlies it the fundamental
idea of the system-yet probably not one
among them knows anything about it in detail, though
he may thoroughly well understand that his method
leaves very little to chance.

@

Viewing the matter then from the point of view of
those who make a business of betting on horses, and
regard themselves as in the profession, here are the
rules for a success

@

First, the bookmaker must always lay odds against
horses, never back them. This is not essential to the
system regarded in its scientific aspect; but in practice,
as will presently appear, it makes it easier to
apply it.

@

Next, he lays against nearly every horse in a race
as early as possible, when the odds are longest. If he
lays against a few which are certain not to run, so
much the better for him; that is so much clear gain to
start with. He should proportion his wagers so that
the sum of what he lays against a horse, and what he
is backed for, may amount to about the same for each
horse. The precise system requires that it should be
exactly the same, but the bookmaker often improves
upon that by taking advantage, in special cases, of his
own knowledge of a horses chance and his opponents
inexperience. In every case he lays odds a point or
two short of the legitimate odds against a horse. Suppose
for a moment that the odds are ten to one against
the horse, then it is always easy to find folk who rather
fancy the horse, and think the odds are not eight to
one, or even six to one, against him; he selects such
persons for his wagers about that horse. He conveys
carefully the idea that he thinks the horses chance
underrated at eight, or even nine to one; but, as a
favour, he will make the odds nine to one. Of course,
he has no occasion to search about for those who favour
any given horse. Every greenhorn has a fancy for
some horse, and is willing to take something short of
the current odds for the privilege of backing him. The
bookmaker can therefore fill in his book,
until at least he has made up sufficient amounts for
most of the horses engaged, when, of course, he gives
more special attention to those whose leaf in his book
is as yet incomplete.

@


But he reasons that the race
is a moral certainty for A, and that it is giving away
money to lay more than to Again, B
is a much better horse than people think, so that
to is quite long enough odds against him; as for C,
no wonder backers stand by him at the odds; for his
part the bookmaker thinks him better than B; and
see what Augur says of him! and so forth, wherefore
he cannot find it in his conscience to lay more than
. to against him. 
So he deals with each, cutting off about
 from the amount he ought to lay against
them severally; but with the horses low in favour, he
can easily cut off more, and the system not only does
not forbid this but encourages it. Say, however, only
 and then his book is complete.

@

The bookmaker can now watch the race with
thorough enjoyment. The pleasure of the backers of
the favourites is a good deal impaired by anxiety, and
though backers of non-favourites have less to lose, they
have more to gain, and less chance of gaining it so
they too are anxious. But the bookmaker can watch
the race with perfect calmness.

@

For, let the race go as it may, he must clear
If A win, the bookmaker willingly pays As backers
 receiving from the backers of B, from
those of C, and so on-in all, If B win, the
bookmaker pays Bs backers, and receives from the
backers of A, C, D,; and so on, whichever
horse may win. There is not, as a rule, any fear about
being paid; these are debts of honour, and to be paid
before all sordid trade debts-nay, so sacred are these
debts, that many of the bookmakers clients would deem
it better to break open a till, or to embezzle a round
sum from an employer, than to leave them unpaid. So
he is under no anxiety.

@

Thus does the bookmaker make a steady income out
of his victims, who go not only complacently to their
fate, but even with a look of wisdom as if they were
rather cleverly taking advantage of the proffered gifts
of fortune.

@

It is easier to tell how they lose than to show how
the bookmaker gains. They adopt of the bookmakers system. Always lays the
odds a little short they always take them so. They
back the favourite boldly, but they do not fail to take
fancies for non-favourites, and to back their fancies
boldly too. It would be absurd to haggle about odds
in the case of a horse which is morally sure to win, or
to insist on ten to one when sure the odds are not seven
to one against a horse. When the simpleton wins he
assures himself he is in the vein, and goes on betting;
if he loses, he assures himself the luck must change,
and goes on betting. By continuing patiently on this
course, it will be odd if he do not learn before long-how
it is that the bookmakers make so much money.

@

Of course I have given here but a mild account of
the way in which men who bet on horses make money.
They have been known to go a great deal farther. Some
will willingly take the odds against a horse after they
knew certainly that the horse would not run. Others,
a shade more advanced, have been known to bribe a
jockey to hold or rope a horse, or a stableman to
poison or even stupefy him. Others, ay, even noble
owners, have been known to work the market in ways
fully as flagitious.

@

Let me, in conclusion, quote two short passages,
one from a letter by Charles Dickens, the other
from a speech by Lord Chief Justice Cockburn.
The first seems to relate to the successful bookmaker-I
look at the back of his bad head repeated
in long lines on the racecourse, and in the betting-stand,
and outside the betting-rooms, and I vow to
God I can see nothing in it but cruelty, covetousness,
calculation, insensibility, and low wickedness.... If
a boy with any good in him, but with a dawning propensity
to sporting and betting, were but brought here
soon enough, it would cure him. The other passage
applies to the bookmaker and his victim alike-The
pernicious and fatal habit of betting is so demoralising
and degrading, that, like some foul leprosy, it will
eat away the conscience until a man comes to think
that it is his duty to himself to do his neighbour as
his neighbour would do him.

@

Long experience has shown that men possessed with
the gambling spirit are not to be deterred from venturing
small sums in order to win large fortunes, even
by the clearest evidence that the price they have to
pay is an unfair one. The Government lotteries in
this country early put this matter to the test. Having
decided on a certain set of money prizes and a certain
number of tickets, the Government did not offer the
tickets to the public for more than they were worth,
but for what they would fetch. They seldom failed
to obtain from contractors at least for a ticket
mathematically worth And the contractors not
only showed by offering these sums their faith in
human credulity, but practically proved the truth of
their faith by disposing of their tickets for or
more than they had paid Government for them.
Thus the Government occupied a very favourable position.
For every million they offered in prizes they
received more than yet they asked no
one to pay an unfair price. They left the contractors
to do that, who were not only willing, but anxious to
undertake the task of shearing the public. Nor were
the public less ready to be plundered than the contractors
were to plunder them. Government had to
protect the public, or rather tried to protect them,
from the contractors, not by putting a limit to the
price which contractors might obtain for tickets, but
by endeavouring to prevent men of small means from
buying tickets in shares of less than a certain value.
Of course, the laws made for this purpose were readily
and systematically broken. The smallest sums were
risked, and the only effect of the laws against such
purchases was that higher prices had to be paid to
cover the risk of detection. We learn that all the
efforts of the police were ineffectual for the suppression
of these illegal proceedings, and for many years a
great and growing repugnance was manifested in
Parliament to this method of raising any part of the
public revenue. At length, in, the last Act that
was sanctioned by Parliament for the sale of lottery-tickets
contained provisions for putting clown all private
lotteries, and for rendering illegal the sale in this
kingdom of all tickets or shares of tickets in any
foreign lottery-which latter provision is to this day
extensively evaded. This was written forty years ago,
but might have been written to-day.

@

The simplest, and in many respects the best, form
of lottery is that in which a number of articles are
taken as prizes, their retail prices added together, and
the total divided into some large number of parts, the
same number of tickets being issued at the price thus
indicated. Suppose, for instance, the prizes amount in
value to, then a thousand tickets might be sold at
.each, or, ateach, or a larger number at a
correspondingly reduced price. In such a case the
lottery is strictly fair, supposing the prizes in good
saleable condition. The person who arranges the lottery
gains neither more nor less than he would if he sold
the articles separately. There may be a slight expense
in arranging the lottery, but this is fully compensated
by the quickness of the sale. The arrangement, I say,
is fair; but I do not say it is desirable, or even that it
should be permissible. Advantage is taken of the love
of gambling, innate in most men, to make a quick sale
of goods which otherwise might have lain long on hand.
Encouragement is given to a tendency which is inherently
objectionable if not absolutely vicious. And
so far as the convenience is concerned of those who collectively
buy the prizes, it manifestly cannot
be so well suited as though those only had bought who
really wanted the articles, each taking the special article
he required. Those who buy tickets want to get
more than their moneys worth. Some of them, if not
all, are believers in their own good luck, and expect to
get more than they pay for. They are willing to get,
in this way, something which very likely they do not
want, something therefore which will be worth less to
them in reality than the price for which it is justly
enough valued in the list of prizes.

@

Unfortunately those who arrange lotteries of this
sort for mere trade purposes are not careful to estimate the price
of each article justly. They put a fancy price on good
articles, a full price on damaged articles, and throw in
an extra sum for no articles at all. Many of them are
not at all particular, if the sale of tickets is quick, about
throwing in a few hundred more tickets than they had
originally provided for, without in the least considering
it necessary to add correspondingly to the list of prizes.

@

But this is not all. How much those who arrange such
lotteries really wrong the purchasers of tickets cannot
be known. But we can learn how ready the ticket-buyers
are to be wronged, when we note what they will
allow. It seems absurd enough that they should let the
manager of a lottery act entirely without check or control
as to the number of tickets or the plan according to
which these are drawn. But at least when a day is
appointed for the drawing, and the prizes are publicly
exhibited in the first instance, and as publicly distributed
eventually, the ticket-buyers know that the lottery has
been in some degree What, however, can we
think of those who will pay for the right of drawing a
ticket from a wheel of fortune, without having the
least means of determining what is marked on any of
the tickets, or whether a single ticket is marked for a
prize worth more than the price paid for a chance, or
even worth as much? Yet nothing is more common
where such wheels are allowed, and nothing was more
common when they were allowed here, than for a shopman
to offer for a definite sum, which frequenters of the
shop would readily pay, the chance of drawing a prize-ticket
out of a wheel of fortune, though he merely
assured them, without a particle of proof, that some of
the tickets would give them prizes worth many times
the price they paid. Even when there were such
tickets, again, and someone had secured a prize, people who had seen this would buy
chances as though the removal of one good prize-ticket
had made no difference whatever in the value of a
chance. They would actually be encouraged to buy
chances by the very circumstance which should have
deterred them. For if a good prize is drawn in such a
case, the chances are that no good prize is left.

@

Although lotteries of this sort are no longer allowed
by law, yet are they still to some degree countenanced in
connection with charity and the fine arts. Now, setting
aside lotteries connected with the fine arts as singularly
mixed in character-though it must not for a
moment be supposed that I regard a taste for gambling
with a love of the beautiful as forming an agreeable
mixture-I note that in lotteries started for
charitable purposes there is usually no thought of gain
on the part of those who originate the scheme. That
is, they have no wish to gain money for themselves,
though they may be very anxious to gain money for the
special purpose they have in view. This wish may be,
and indeed commonly proves to be, inconsistent with
strict fairness towards the buyers of tickets. But as
these are supposed to be also possessed with the same
desire to advance a charitable purpose which actuates the
promoters of the scheme, it is not thought unfair to sell
them their tickets rather dearly, or to increase the
number of tickets beyond what the true value of the
prizes would in strict justice permit. It is, however, to
be noted that the assumption by which such procedure
is supposed to be justified is far from being always accurate.
It is certain that a large proportion of those who
buy tickets in charitable lotteries take no interest whatever
in the object for which such lotteries are started.
If lotteries were generally allowed, and therefore fairer
lotteries could be formed than the charitable ones-which
are as unfair in reality as the dealings of lady
stall-keepers at fancy bazaars-the sale of tickets at
charitable lotteries would be greatly reduced. It is only
because those who are possessed by the gambling spirit
can join no other lotteries that they join those started
for charitable purposes. The managers of these lotteries
know this very well, though they may not be ready to
admit very publicly that they do. If pressed on the
subject, they speak of spoiling the Egyptians, of the
end justifying the means, and so forth. But, as a
matter of fact, it remains true that these well-intentioned
folk, often most devout and religious persons, do,
in the pursuit of money for charitable purposes, pander
to the selfishness and greed of the true gambler,
encourage the growth of similar evil qualities in
members of their own community, and set an evil
example, moreover, by systematically breaking the law
of the country. It would be harsh, perhaps, to speak
strongly against persons whose intentions are excellent,
and who are in many cases utterly free from selfish aims;
but they cannot be acquitted from a charge of extreme
folly, nor can it be denied that, be their purpose what it
may, their deeds are evil in fact and evil in their consequences.
It might be difficult to determine whether
the good worked by the total sum gained from one of
these charitable lotteries was a fair equivalent for the
mischief wrought in getting it. But this total is not
all gained by choosing an illegal method of getting the
sum required. The actual gain is only some slight
saving of trouble on the part of the promoters of the
charitable scheme, and a further slight gain to the
pockets of the special community in which the charity
is or should be promoted. And it is certain that these
slight gains by no means justify the use of an illegal
and most mischievous way of obtaining money. It
would be difficult to find any justification for the
system, once the immorality of gambling is admitted,
which might not equally well be urged for a scheme by
which the proceeds of one weeks run of a common
gaming-table should be devoted to the relief of
the sick poor of some religious community. Nay, if
charitable ends can at all justify immoral means, one
might go further still, and allow money to be obtained
for such purposes by the encouragement of still more
objectionable vices. We might in fact recognise quite
a new meaning in the saying that Charity covers a
multitude of sins.

@


I have said that a lottery in which all the prizes
were goods such as might be sold, retail, at prices
amounting to the total cost of all the tickets sold, would
be strictly fair. I do not know whether a lottery ever
has been undertaken in that way. But certainly it
seems conceivable that such a thing might have happened;
and in that case, despite the objections which,
as we have shown, exist against such an arrangement,
there would have been a perfectly fair lottery.
Adam Smith, in his Wealth of Nations, seems to have
omitted the consideration of lotteries of this kind, when
he said that the world neither ever saw, nor ever will
see, a perfectly fair lottery, or one in which the whole
gain compensated the whole loss; because the undertaker
could gain nothing by it. Indeed, it has
certainly happened in several cases that there have been
lotteries in which the total price of the tickets fell short
of the total value of the prizes-these being presents
made for a charitable purpose, and the tickets purposely
sold at very low prices. It is well known, too, that in
ancient Rome, where lotteries are said to have been
invented, chances in lotteries were often, if not always,
distributed gratuitously.

@

But assuredly Adam Smith is justified in his remark
if it be regarded as relating solely to lotteries in which
the prizes have been sums of money, and gain has been
the sole object of the promoters. In the State lotteries,
as he justly says, the tickets are really not worth
the price which is paid by the original subscribers,
though from his sequent remarks it appears that he had
very imperfect information respecting some of the more
monstrous cases of robbery by promoters of some of these State swindles.

@

The first idea in State lotteries seems to have been
to adopt the simple arrangement by which a certain
sum is paid for each of a given number of tickets, the
series of prizes provided being less in total value than
the sum thus obtained.

@

It was soon found, however, as I have already
pointed out, that people are easily gulled in matters
of chance, so that the State could safely assume a
very disinterested attitude. Having provided prizes
of definite value, and arranged the number of tickets,
it simply offered these for sale to contractors. The
profit to the State consisted in the excess of the sum
which the contractors willingly offered above the just
value of each ticket. This sum varied
with circumstances, but generally was about or
per ticket beyond the proper price. That is, the contractors
paid about or for tickets really worth
. They were allowed to divide the tickets into
shares-halves, quarters, eighths, and sixteenths. When
a contractor sold a full ticket he usually got from
. to for it; but when he sold a ticket in shares
his gain per ticket was considerably greater. The
object in limiting the subdivision to one-sixteenth
was to prevent labouring men from risking their
earnings.

@

It is hardly necessary to say, however, that the
provision was constantly and easily evaded, or that
the means used for evading the limitation only aggravated
the evil. At illegal offices, commonly known as
little goes, any sum, however small, could be risked,
and to cover the chance of detection and punishment
these offices required greater profits than the legal
lottery offices. Precisely as attempts to prevent usury
caused the necessitous borrowers of money to be mulcted
even more severely than they would otherwise have
been, so the attempt to protect the poor from falling
into gambling ways resulted only in driving them to
gamble against more ruinous odds.

@

The record of national lotteries in England ranges
over two centuries and a half. It forms an interesting,
though little studied, chapter in the history of the
nation, and throws curious light on the follies and
weaknesses of human nature.

@

The earliest English lottery on record is that of the
year, when, chances were sold at each,
the prizes being articles of plate, and the profit used in
the repair of certain harbours. The gambling spirit
seems to have developed greatly during the next century;
for, early in the reign of Queen Anne, it was found necessary
to suppress private lotteries as public nuisances,
a description far better applicable to public lotteries. In the early period of the
history of the National Debt, says a writer in the Penny Cyclopdia, it was usual to
pay the prizes in the State lotteries in the form of
terminable annuities. In a loan of a million was
raised by the sale of lottery-tickets at per ticket,
the prizes in which were funded at the rate of per
cent. About this time
the spirit of gambling had been still more remarkably
developed than in Annes reign, despite the laws passed
to suppress private lotteries. In an Act was
passed by which every person keeping a lottery-office
was obliged to take out a yearly license costing
This measure reduced the number of such offices from
 to In France the demoralisation of the people
resulting from the immorality of the Government in
encouraging by lotteries the gambling spirit, was greater
even than in England.

@

The fairest system for such lotteries as we have
hitherto considered was that adopted in the Hamburg
lotteries. Here, the whole money for which tickets were
sold was distributed in the form of prizes, except a deduction
of per cent. criminal or immoral when authorised by
law. If they were nuisances, it was in the manner
in which they were managed. In England, if not in
France, there were lotteries
annually instituted by Government, and it was considered
a fair way to reach the pockets of misers and
persons disposed to dissipate their funds. The American
Congress of instituted a national lottery, and
perhaps no body of men ever surpassed them in intelligence and virtue. DeMorgan, remarking on this
expression of opinion, says that it shows what a man of
high character for integrity and knowledge thought of
lotteries twenty years ago . The
opinions which he expressed were at that time, continued
DeMorgan, shared, we venture to say, by a
great number.

@

The experience of those who arranged these earlier
State lotteries showed that from men in general, especially
the ignorant, almost any price may be asked for the chance of making
a large fortune at one lucky stroke. Albeit, it was
seen that the nature of the fraud practised should
preferably be such that not one man in a thousand
would be able to point out where the wrong really lay.
Again, it was perceived that if the prizes in a lottery
were reduced too greatly in number but increased in
size, the smallness of the chance of winning one of the
few prizes left would become too obvious. A system
was required by which the number of prizes might seem
unlimited and their possible value very great, while also
there should be a possibility of the founders of the
lottery not getting back all they ventured. So long as
it was absolutely certain that, let the event be what it
might, the managers of the lottery would gain, some
might be deterred from risking their money by the
simple statement of this fact. Moreover, under such
conditions, it was always possible that at some time the
wrath of losers might
be roused in a dangerous way, unless it could be shown
that the managers of public lotteries ran some chance,
though it might be only a small chance, of losing,
and even some chance of ruin as absolute as that which
might befall individual gamblers.

@

It was to meet such difficulties as these that lottery
systems like that sometimes called the Geneva system
were invented. This system I propose now to describe,
as illustrating these more speculative ventures, showing
in particular how the buyers of chances were defrauded
in the favourite methods of venturing.

@

In the Geneva lottery there are ninety numbers. At
each drawing five are taken. The simplest venture is
made on a single number. A sum is hazarded on a
named number, and if this number is one of the five
drawn, the speculator receives fifteen times the value of
his stake. Such a venture is called a
It is easy to see that in the long run the lottery-keeper
must gain by this system. The chance that the number
selected out of ninety will appear among five numbers
drawn, is the same that a selected number out of
eighteen would appear at a single drawing. It is one
chance in eighteen. Now if a person bought a single
ticket out of eighteen, each costing, his fair
prize if he drew the winning ticket should be This
is what he would have to pay to buy up all the eighteen
tickets . The position of the speculator who buys one number at in the Geneva
lottery, is precisely that of a purchaser of such a ticket,
only that, instead of a prize being if he wins, it is
only The lottery-keepers position on a single
venture is not precisely that of one who should have
sold eighteen tickets at each, for a lottery having one
prize only; for the latter would be certain to gain money
if the prize were any sum short of, whereas the
Geneva lottery-keeper will lose on a single venture,
supposing the winning number is drawn, though the
prize is instead of But in the long run the
Geneva lottery-keeper is certain to win at these odds.
He is in the position of a man who continually wagers
odds of to against the occurrence of an event the
real odds against which are to Or his position
may be compared to that of a player who takes seventeen
chances out of eighteen at their just value, each
or in all, his opponent taking the remaining chance
at its value, but instead of the total stakes,
being left in the pool, the purchaser of the larger
number abstracts from the pool at each venture.

@

That men can be found to agree to such an arrangement
as this shows that their confidence in their own
good fortune makes them willing to pay, for the chance
of getting fifteen times their stake, what they ought to
pay for the chance of getting eighteen times its value.
The amount of which they are in reality defrauded at
each venture is easily calculated. Suppose the speculator
to venture Now the actual value of one chance
in eighteen of any prize is one-eighteenth of that prize,
which in this case should therefore be If, then,
the prize really played for has but fifteen-eighteenths
of its true value, or is in this case, the value of a
single chance amounts only to one-eighteenth of, or
to Thus at each venture of the speculator
is cheated out of, or one-sixth of his stake.

@

This, however, is a mere trifle. In the old-fashioned
English system of lotteries, the purchaser of a ticket
often paid more than, so that he was defrauded by
more than half his stake; and though less than half the
robbery went into the hands of the contractor who
actually sold the ticket, the rest of the robbery went to
the State.

@

In other ventures, by the Geneva system, the
old-fashioned English system of robbery was far surpassed.

@

Instead of naming one number for a drawing the speculator may say
in what position among the five his number is to come.
If he is successful, he receives seventy times his stake.
This is, in effect, exactly the same as though but one
number was drawn. The speculator has only one
chance out of ninety instead of one chance out of five.
He ought then, in strict justice, to receive ninety times
his stake, if he wins. Supposing his venture, the
prize for success should be By reducing it to. to one-nineteenth part of, or
to
defrauding the speculator of two-ninths of his stake.
Such a venture as this is called a

@

The next venture allowed in the Geneva system is
called Two numbers are chosen. If both
these appear among the five drawn, the prize is 
times the stake. Now among the numbers the
player can select two, in, different ways; for he
can first take any one of the numbers, and then he can
take for his second number any one of the numbers
left; that is, he may make different first selections,
each leaving him a choice of different second selections;
so that there are times possible
selections in all. But in any set of five numbers there
are, treating them in the same way, only different arrangements of two numbers. So that
out of, possible selections only appear in each
drawing of five numbers. The speculators chance then
is only in, or in ; and he ought, if he
wins, to have for prize his stake increased in the ratio
of to, or times. Instead of this it is increased
only times. At each venture he receives
in return for his stake a chance worth less than his
stake, in the same degree that is less than ;
he is, in fact, defrauded of nearly one-third the value of
his stake.

@

The next venture is called Here
the speculator names the order in which two selected
numbers will appear. Instead of chances at any
drawing of five numbers, he has only one chance-one
chance in He ought then to receive, times
his stake, if he wins. As a matter of fact he receives
only, times his stake. From this it follows that
he is defrauded of, out of, parts of his stake,
or very nearly three-eighths of the stakes value.

@

But more speculative ventures remain. The speculator
can name three numbers. Now there are,
possible selections of three numbers out of These can appear among the five
drawn numbers in different ways . Thus the speculator has chances out of,
or one chance in He ought then to receive
, times his stake, if he wins; but in reality he
receives only, times his stake in this event. Thus
the lottery-keeper robs him of more than half of his just
winnings, if successful, and of more than half the mathematical
value of his stake at the outset. The venture
in this case is called 
is not allowed. If it were, the prize of a successful
guess should be, times the stake.

@

Simple is, at present, the most speculative
venture adopted. Formerly was allowed, the
speculator having five numbers, and, if all five were
drawn, receiving a million times the value of his stake.
He should have received, times its value;
so that, in effect, he was deprived of more than forty-thirds
of the true value of his venture.

@

The following table shows the amount by which the
terms of the Geneva system reduce the value of the
stake in these different cases, the stake being set at

@

It may be thought, perhaps, that such speculative
ventures as terne and quaterne would very seldom be
made. But the reverse was the case. These were the
favourite ventures; and that they were made very often
is proved to everyone acquainted with the laws of
chance by the circumstance that they not unfrequently
proved successful. For every time such a venture as a
simple quaterne was won, it must have been lost some
half a million times.

@

It appears that in France the Geneva system was
adopted without any of the limitations we have mentioned,
and with some additional chances for those who
like fanciful ventures. Professor De Morgan, in his
Budget of Paradoxes says-In the French lottery five
numbers out of ninety were drawn at a time any
person, in any part of the country, might stake any sum
upon any event he pleased, as that should be drawn;
that and should be drawn; that and 
should be drawn, and first; and so on up to a, if he chose, which is betting on five given
numbers in a given order. The chance of a successful
guess, in this last case, is in, Yet if
every grown person in Europe made one guess a day,
venturing a penny on the guess, and receiving the just
prize, or say,, times his stake, on winning,
it would be practically certain that in less than a year
some one would win being
won, but a simple, the odds against which, be it
remembered, are nearly millions to, has been won;
and simple, against which the odds are more
than half a million to, have often been won. In
July a strange circumstance occurred. The coincidence was so remarkable,
that one can understand a suspicion arising that a hint had been
given from some one employed at the lottery-office.
M.Menut insinuates this, and a recent occurrence at
Naples suggests at least the possibility of collusion between
gamblers and the drawers of lottery numbers.
But in the case above cited the smallness of the stakes
warrants the belief that the result was purely accidental.
Certainly the gamblers would have staked more had
they known what was to be the actual result of the
drawing. The larger winner seems to have staked two
sous only, the prize being, I suppose,, times
the stake, instead of, as on a similar venture
in the Geneva lottery. Possibly the stake was a foreign
coin, and hence the actual value of the prize was not a
round number of francs. The smaller winner probably
staked five sous or thereabouts in foreign coin.

@

Doubtless the origin of this idea was the observed
circumstance that the more speculative ventures had
a great charm for the common mind. Despite the
enormous deduction made from the just value of the
prize, when,, and other such ventures
were made, the public in France, Switzerland, and Italy
bought these ventures by millions, as was shown by the
fact that several times in each year even were
won. Now in the Petersburg plan there was a chance,
however small, of enormous winnings. Head might
not appear till the tenth, twelfth, or even the twentieth
tossing; and then the prize would be 
 original corrected to 
or respectively. It was felt that tens of
millions would be tempted by the chance of such enormous
gains; and it was thought that the gains of
Government would be proportionately heavy. All that
was necessary was that the just value of a chance
in this lottery should be ascertained by mathematicians,
and the price properly raised.

@

Mathematicians very readily solved the problem,
though one or two of the most distinguished rejected the solution as incomprehensible
and paradoxical. Let the reader who takes
interest enough in such matters pause for a moment
here to inquire what would be a natural and probable
value for a chance in the suggested lottery. Few, we
believe, would give. Yet the just value of a chance is
greater than, greater than, greater than any
sum which can be named. A Government, indeed,
which would offer to sell these chances at say. Yet still the mathematical proposition
is sound, that if the number of speculators in the
Petersburg lottery were absolutely unlimited, no sum,
however great, would fairly represent the price of a
chance. And while that unpractical result is true,
the practical result is easily proved, that the larger the
number of venturers the greater should be the price for
each chance-a relation which absolutely forbids the
employment of this method of keeping lotteries.

@

Let us see how this can be shown. De Morgan has
given a demonstration, but it is not one to be very
readily understood by those not versed in mathematical
methods of reasoning. I believe, however, that the
following proof will be found easy to understand, while
at the same time satisfactory and convincing.

@

Suppose that eight ventures only are made, and
that among the eight, four, or exactly half, toss head
the first time; of the remaining four, two half-toss
head at the second trial; of the remaining two, one
tosses head at the third trial; while the other tosses
head at the fourth trial. This may be regarded as
representing what might on the average be expected
from eight trials, though in reality it does not; for of
course, if it did, the average price per chance, inferred
from eight such trials, would be the true average for
eight million trials, or for eight million times eight
million. Still it fairly represents all that could be
hoped for from a single set of eight ventures. Now
we see that the sums paid in prizes, in this case,
would be four times. and one who
receives The total, then, is, giving an average
of; and one; a total of, giving an
average of. in all;
thus we get as many pounds as there are ventures for
this first halving. Next receive or and still leaving one
who has not yet tossed head. Since each halving
gives us we now have ten times The
last speculator tosses head at the next trial and wins
 making a grand total of twelve times 
or twelve times as many pounds as there are speculators.
The average, therefore, amounts to then, is a fair value.

@

But of course, the whole train of our reasoning
proves that while probably since two
millions is nearly equal to raised to the st power.
There might be a million million ventures; and ifthe average value of each chance would be
..
But he strangely omits one of the last pair of trials altogether.
Thus, he says, in the long run, and on, trials, we might expect
two sets in which heads should not appear till the tenth
throw, which is right, and one in which no such thing should take
place till the eleventh, which is also right. But it is because there
will probably be four trials of which two only will probably give
heads, that we may expect two to give tails yet once more. The
two which gave heads are the two first mentioned by De Morgan,
in which heads appear at the tenth throw. Of the two remaining
we expect one to give head, the other tail. The former is the
one next mentioned by De Morgan, in which head appears at
the eleventh throw. The other in which tail may be expected to
appear is the most valuable of all. Even if head appears at the
next or twelfth tossing, this trial brings a prize worth twice as many
pounds as the total number of trials-and therefore adds
and Buffons result is quite as near as could be
expected in a single experiment on, trials.

@

But when we take the four experiments collectively,
getting in this way the results of, trials, we find the average value of each chance
greatly increased, as theory requires-and, as it happens,
increased even beyond the value which theory assigns
as probable for this number of trials. Among them
there was only one in which head appeared after tail
had been tossed times, whereas we might expect that
there would be four such cases; but there was one case
in which head only appeared after tail had been tossed
 times, and there were two cases in which head only
appeared after tail had been tossed times. Of course
this was purely accidental. We may always be tolerably
sure that in a large number of tossings, about one-half
will be head and about one-half tail. But when
only a few tossings are to be made, this proportion can
no longer be looked for with the same high degree of
probability.

@

It is singular that whereas it would be almost impossible
to persuade even one person to venture. We see then that the
gamblers are very poor judges of chances, rejecting 
risks of one kind, while accepting 
those of another kind, though of equal mathematical
value, or even greater.

@

In passing, I may note that the possibility of winning
abnormally valuable prizes in the Petersburg lottery
affords another explanation of the apparent paradox
involved in the assertion that no sum, however large,
fairly represents the mathematical value of each trial.
To obtain the just price of a lottery-ticket, we must
multiply each prize by the chance of getting it, and add
the results together; this is the mathematical value of
one chance or ticket. Now in the Petersburg lottery
the possible prizes are,, and so on,
doubling to infinity; the chances of getting each are,
respectively, one-half, one-fourth, one-eighth, one-sixteenth,
and so on. The value of a chance, then, is the
half of, added to the quarter of, to the eighth of
 and so on to infinity, each term of the infinite series
being Hence the mathematical value of a single
chance is infinite. The result appears paradoxical; but
it really means only that the oftener the trial is made,
the greater will be the probable average value of the
prizes obtained. Or, as in fact the solution is that if
the number of trials were infinite the value of each
would be infinite, we only obtain a paradoxical result in
an impossible case. Note also that the two kinds of
infinity involved in the number of trials and in the just
mathematical price of each are different. If the number
of trials were raised to an infinitely high power,
the probable average value of each trial would be the
infinitely high number representing that power. But
 raised to that power would give an infinitely higher
number. To take very large numbers instead of infinite
numbers, which simply elude us-Suppose the number
of trials could be raised to the millionth power; then
the probable average value of each would be 
which is a large number of pounds; but the number is a
mere nothing compared with the number of trials, a number
containing, ! If the smallest atom, according
to the estimate made by physicists, were divided
into a million millions of parts, the entire volume of a
sphere exceeding a million million times in radius the
distance of the remotest star brought into view by Lord
Rosses mighty telescope would not contain a million
millionth of that number of these indefinitely minute
subdivisions of the atom. Nay, we might write trillions
or quadrillions where we have just written millions in
the preceding lines, and yet not have a number reaching
a quadrillionth part of the way to the inconceivable
number obtained by raising to the millionth power.
Yet for this tremendous number of trials the average
mathematical value of each would amount but to a
poor million-absolutely nothing by comparison.

@


If there is any evil quality of human nature which, by
its persistence, its wide-spreading and its mischievous
influence, speaks of the inborn savagery of human
nature, it is the greed for chance-won wealth. In all
ages men have been moved by it. It has seemed so
natural, that men have lost sight of its innate immorality.
If I take my chance fairly with others and
win, the gambler argues, I have done no man wrong,
not even myself or the members of my family. What
I win I can regard as gain, not less legitimate than the
profits on some business transaction. If other men are
ruined, or if I run the risk of ruin myself, this is no more
than happens all the time. Other men may be killed
in various chance ways; I may myself be killed ere the
day is out in some chance manner why should I not,
since I and others must incur the chances of life, raise
other chance issues by which either gain or loss may
result to others or to myself?

@

It may be that false though this reasoning is as a
defence, there is more of excuse in it than those imagine
who use it. Beyond doubt the element of chance which
enters into all lives, has had a most potent influence in
moulding the characters of all men. If we consider the
multitudinous fancies and superstitions of men like
sailors, farmers, and hunters, whose lives depend more
on chance than those of men in other employments, and
recognise this as the natural effect of the influence
which chance has on their fortunes, we need not wonder
if the influence of chance in moulding the minds and
characters of our ancestors during countless generations,
should have produced a very marked effect on human
nature. An immense number of those from whom I
 inherit descent, must in the old savage
days have depended almost wholly on chance for the
very means of subsistence. When wild in wood the
savage ran, he ran
on speculation. He might or might not be lucky
enough to earn his living on any day by a successful
chase, or by finding such fruits of the earth as would
supply him with a satisfactory amount of food. He
might have as much depending on chances which he
could not avoid risking, as the gambler of to-day has
when he sees red and stakes his whole fortune on
a throw of the dice or a turn of the cards. We cannot
be doubtful about the effects of such chance influences
on even the individual character. Repeated generation
after generation they must have tended to fill men with
a gambling spirit, only to be corrected by many generations
of steady labour; and unfortunately, even in the
steadiest work the element of chance enters largely
enough to render the corrective influence of such work
on the character of the race much slower than it might otherwise be.
Every man who has to work for a living at all, every
man who has to depend in any way on business for
wealth has to trust more or less to chance in many respects.
So that nearly all men have their characters in some
degree modified by this peculiarity of their environment.
The inherited tendency of each one of us towards
gambling, in some one or other of its multitudinous
forms, is undoubtedly strengthened in this way; though
fortunately it may be much more than correspondingly
weakened by training, by thought, and by steady pursuance
of lifes proper work.

@

That gambling is immoral has been recognised by
those who have noticed the effects of established lottery
systems, or of gambling establishments such as formerly
were allowed to flourish in our cities, to the demoralisation
and ruin of thousands-among rich and poor alike.
Governments which once originated lotteries, and
reaped large profit from them, now not only cease to
raise money in so iniquitous a manner, but forbid
lotteries, and, as far as they can, prevent them. That
they remain an attraction for an immense number of
our people is shown by the circumstance that lotteries
permitted on the Continent advertise largely in English
newspapers and periodicals, and that their circulars
reach thousands of Englishmen through the post. I
have myself had experience of the assiduities of Continental
lottery promoters in both forms, having received
dozens of invitations to invest in these demoralising
ventures, and having also had any number of advertisements
offered for Knowledge. Yet every
lottery system, when it comes to be examined, proves,
as I have shown in essays on lotteries, to be based on
fraud-in such sort as to bring sure gains to the promoters
of the lottery, sure loss in the long run to the
purchasers of tickets-sure ruin even, if they will but
avail themselves in sufficient degree of the opportunities
for ruin obligingly proffered them.

@

In England, fortunately, lotteries are illegal. Yet
a method has been devised by which all classes of the
community may court fortune or ruin in the freest
manner, without gambling on card games or entering on turf speculations . I know not
that at the worst gambling-hells in the bad old times of
the Georges fortunes could be more
readily squandered than by the various forms of speculation
in stocks now made of easy access and convenient
procedure for all classes of our people-for men, for
women, and even for those who are little more than
children.

@

Speculation on the Stock Exchange has, of course,
been always a recognised method of gambling. In such
speculation as in the system now invitingly offered to
all classes there was often, if not generally, very little
money behind the speculations, compared with the
amount actually supposed to be invested in the various
transactions. A speculator need be prepared only to pay the
difference between the value of the stock he is supposed
to have bought or sold at the beginning of the time-bargain
and its diminished or increased value when the
time expires. Thus a man shall nominally buy which at the
end of the time for which the shares are supposed to
have been bought, shall be worth only in that
case, apart from brokerage or commission, he loses
nominally, and

@

only some such proportion as this of the large
sum bought or sold that he will actually lose if unfortunate,
or gain if he has luck, on a transaction which has
such imposing dimensions.

@

The system, however, by which gambling in stocks
is now made accessible to all is more inviting than the
system of time-bargains.

@

By the time-bargain system a man could not tell
how much he was risking, any more than he could
tell how much he might gain. When settling time
came he might have won much or little, or he might
have lost little or much, on any particular speculation.
The probable gains and the probable losses, apart
from special knowledge or supposed knowledge of the
chances of rise or fall in price, were evenly balanced.

@

Now, though this might do very well for men on
Change, just as hard gamblers in the good old times
were well content to risk their money on the pulling of
a straw or the toss of a die, risks of this sort have no
attraction for the average gamblers of the ordinary type.
If the history of men who have lost largely on the turf
were known, it would be found that, for one case where
the loss has arisen from wagers on even terms, there will
be a thousand or probably an even larger number in
which men have been ruined by backing horses at odds.
What the average gambler, who is nearly always a
weakling, wants, is a chance of winning a large sum by
risking a small one. If he backs a horse at odds he is
well pleased. But then the horse must also be a
favourite, or at least he must himself have a high
opinion of the horses chance. Now a horse cannot be
a favourite and also have the odds against him, unless
there is a good field. Hence, the average betting man
of the pigeon type likes to lay his money on one or other
of the favourites in a large race, where the odds are
at least four or five to one against even the chief
favourite. Then if he loses he loses but a small sum
compared with that which he has a chance of gaining. The bookmaker,
as we have seen, takes advantage of this delusion. He is
aware that a man who, knowing little about horses, fancies
a particular horse-on the strength, perhaps, of false
information which the bookmaker himself may have
helped to spread-will not be careful to note whether the
precise odds are offered. If the current odds are to,
the simpleton will be content with or to, or
even less. The bookmaker, then, acts on the contrary
principle. He always, or nearly always, lays the odds
against horses-he seems to risk much to gain little-but,
on the plan he actually follows of always offering
less than the fair odds, his multiplied little gains nearly
always outbalance heavily his occasional heavy losses.
We occasionally hear of a large bookmaker coming to
grief; but not often, not nearly so often, as one could
wish.

@

Seeing that such are the ways of the gambling
public, it will be seen that the method of gambling
followed by men on Change would not be seductive
enough for the general public. Those who live on the
weakness of men for gambling very soon found this out.
Although some among them tried to make the Stock
Exchange system of speculating generally available,
the public, as a whole, were never greatly attracted
by a method of making a fortune which seemed to them
both slow and dangerous.

@

But a system is in vogue now which is as seductive
as any lottery system, is at present safe from check or punishment, and insures a
splendid profit from the foolish folk who take part in it,
even from those who win money by it-as, for a time,
the speculators often do.

@

This system, which men on Change by no means
like for their own transactions, is that called the cover
system; as a method of courting ruin it is the perfection
of simplicity.

@

In the cover system each transaction is closed, not
when a certain time but when a certain money limit is
reached . The speculator-the victim we may call
him, gaily though he trips up the altar steps-pays a
certain sum to a stockbroker of a certain class, as a
cover or deposit upon a hundred times that amount in
some stock which he fancies, or thinks he knows, will
rise or fall in price. He may be either a buyer or a
seller, either a bull or a bear. It is
not necessary, if he is a buyer, that there should be any
real seller, or, if he is a seller, that there should be any
real buyer. Nothing is necessarily bought or sold-. The
account having been now opened for that particular
stock, all that has to be done is to wait until the account
can be closed at a profit.

@

If stock has been nominally bought, the speculator
waits for it to rise, so that when it has risen high
enough he may close the account and gather in his
gains; or, if stock has been sold, he waits in like
manner until it shall fall. When it is rising or falling
to his advantage he is in pleasing doubt whether the
time has arrived to close to the greatest attainable
advantage. If he waits too long and it begins to move
the wrong way, he is apt to wait a little longer for the
motion in that wrong direction to cease-often with
disastrous results; but if he does not wait long enough,
and after the account has been closed the stock still continues
to move in what would have been the right direction
had the account been kept open, then he is made
miserable by the thought that he has thrown away money
which he might have gained. As he very seldom hits
the precise moment when the greatest possible profit is
to be reaped, he nearly always has the discomfort which
arises from the thought that he has closed the account
too soon or too late.

@
