Statistical techniques are employed in almost every phase of life. Surveys are de-
signed to collect early returns on election day and forecast the outcome of an election.
Consumers are sampled to provide information for predicting product preferences.
Research physicians conduct experiments to determine the effect of various drugs and
controlled environmental conditions on humans in order to infer the appropriate treat-
ment for various illnesses. Engineers sample a product quality characteristic and var-
ious controllable process variables to identify key variables related to product quality.
to ship or hold individual lots. Economists observe various indices of economic health
over a period of time and use the information to forecast the condition of the economy
in the future. Statistical techniques play an important role in achieving the objective
of each of these practical situations. The development of the theory underlying these
techniques is the focus of this text.
A prerequisite to a discussion of the theory of statistics is a definition of statis-
tics and a statement of its objectives. Webster’s New Collegiate Dictionary defines
statistics as “a branch of mathematics dealing with the collection, analysis, interpre-
tation, and presentation of masses of numerical data.” Stuart and Ord (1991) state:
“Statistics is the branch of the scientific method which deals with the data obtained by
counting or measuring the properties of populations.” Rice (1995), commenting on
experimentation and statistical applications, states that statistics is “essentially con-
cerned with procedures for analyzing data, especially data that in some vague sense
have a random character.” Freund and Walpole (1987), among others, view statistics
as encompassing “the science of basing inferences on observed data and the entire problem of making decisions in the face of uncertainty.” And Mood, Graybill, and
Boes (1974) define statistics as “the technology of the scientific method” and add
that statistics is concerned with “(1) the design of experiments and investigations,
(2) statistical inference.” A superficial examination of these definitions suggests a
substantial lack of agreement, but all possess common elements. Each description
implies that data are collected, with inference as the objective. Each requires select-
ing a subset of a large collection of data, either existent or conceptual, in order to
infer the characteristics of the complete set. All the authors imply that statistics is a
theory of information, with inference making as its objective.
The large body of data that is the target of our interest is called the population, and
the subset selected from it is a sample. The preferences of voters for a gubernatorial
candidate, Jones, expressed in quantitative form (1 for “prefer” and 0 for “do not
prefer”) provide a real, finite, and existing population of great interest to Jones. To
determine the true fraction who favor his election, Jones would need to interview
all eligible voters—a task that is practically impossible. The voltage at a particular
point in the guidance system for a spacecraft may be tested in the only three sys-
tems that have been built. The resulting data could be used to estimate the voltage
characteristics for other systems that might be manufactured some time in the future.
In this case, the population is conceptual. We think of the sample of three as being
representative of a large population of guidance systems that could be built using the
same method. Presumably, this population would possess characteristics similar to
the three systems in the sample. Analogously, measurements on patients in a medical
experiment represent a sample from a conceptual population consisting of all patients
similarly afflicted today, as well as those who will be afflicted in the near future. You
will find it useful to clearly define the populations of interest for each of the scenarios
described earlier in this section and to clarify the inferential objective for each.
It is interesting to note that billions of dollars are spent each year by U.S. indus-
try and government for data from experimentation, sample surveys, and other data
collection procedures. This money is expended solely to obtain information about
phenomena susceptible to measurement in areas of business, science, or the arts. The
implications of this statement provide keys to the nature of the very valuable contri-
bution that the discipline of statistics makes to research and development in all areas
of society. Information useful in inferring some characteristic of a population (either
existing or conceptual) is purchased in a specified quantity and results in an inference
(estimation or decision) with an associated degree of goodness. For example, if Jones
arranges for a sample of voters to be interviewed, the information in the sample can be
used to estimate the true fraction of all voters who favor Jones’s election. In addition
to the estimate itself, Jones should also be concerned with the likelihood (chance)
that the estimate provided is close to the true fraction of eligible voters who favor his
election. Intuitively, the larger the number of eligible voters in the sample, the higher
will be the likelihood of an accurate estimate. Similarly, if a decision is made regarding
the relative merits of two manufacturing processes based on examination of samples
of products from both processes, we should be interested in the decision regarding
which is better and the likelihood that the decision is correct. In general, the study of
statistics is concerned with the design of experiments or sample surveys to obtain a
specified quantity of information at minimum cost and the optimum use of this infor-
mation in making an inference about a population. The objective of statistics is to make

@

The mechanism instrumental in making inferences can be well illustrated by analyzing
our own intuitive inference-making procedures.
Suppose that two candidates are running for a public office in our community
and that we wish to determine whether our candidate, Jones, is favored to win. The
population of interest is the set of responses from all eligible voters who will vote on
election day, and we wish to determine whether the fraction favoring Jones exceeds .5.
For the sake of simplicity, suppose that all eligible voters will go to the polls and that
we randomly select a sample of 20 from the courthouse roster of voters. All 20 are
contacted and all favor Jones. What do you conclude about Jones’s prospects for
winning the election?
There is little doubt that most of us would immediately infer that Jones will win.
This is an easy inference to make, but this inference itself is not our immediate goal.
Rather, we wish to examine the mental processes that were employed in reaching this
conclusion about the prospective behavior of a large voting population based on a
sample of only 20 people.
Winning means acquiring more than 50% of the votes. Did we conclude that Jones
would win because we thought that the fraction favoring Jones in the sample was
identical to the fraction favoring Jones in the population? We know that this is prob-
ably not true. A simple experiment will verify that the fraction in the sample favoring
Jones need not be the same as the fraction of the population who favor him. If a bal-
anced coin is tossed, it is intuitively obvious that the true proportion of times it will
turn up heads is .5. Yet if we sample the outcomes for our coin by tossing it 20 times,
the proportion of heads will vary from sample to sample; that is, on one occasion
we might observe 12 heads out of 20 flips, for a sample proportion of 12/20 = .6.
On another occasion, we might observe 8 heads out of 20 flips, for a sample pro-
portion of 8/20 = .4. In fact, the sample proportion of heads could be 0, .05, .10,

@

Did we conclude that Jones would win because it would be impossible for 20 out
of 20 sample voters to favor him if in fact less than 50% of the electorate intended to
vote for him? The answer to this question is certainly no, but it provides the key to
our hidden line of logic. It is not impossible to draw 20 out of 20 favoring Jones when
less than 50% of the electorate favor him, but it is highly improbable. As a result, we
concluded that he would win.

@

Theories are conjectures proposed to explain phenomena in the real world. As such,
theories are approximations or models for reality. These models or explanations of
realityarepresentedinverbalforminsomelessquantitativefieldsandasmathematical
relationships in others. Whereas a theory of social change might be expressed verbally
in sociology, a description of the motion of a vibrating string is presented in a precise
mathematical manner in physics. When we choose a mathematical model for a phys-
ical process, we hope that the model reflects faithfully, in mathematical terms, the
attributes of the physical process. If so, the mathematical model can be used to arrive
at conclusions about the process itself. If we could develop an equation to predict the
position of a vibrating string, the quality of the prediction would depend on how well
the equation fit the motion of the string. The process of finding a good equation is
not necessarily simple and usually requires several simplifying assumptions (uniform
string mass, no air resistance, etc.). The final criterion for deciding whether a model
is “good” is whether it yields good and useful information. The motivation for using
mathematical models lies primarily in their utility.
This text is concerned with the theory of statistics and hence with models of reality.
We will postulate theoretical frequency distributions for populations and will develop
a theory of probability and inference in a precise mathematical manner. The net result
will be a theoretical or mathematical model for acquiring and utilizing information
in real life. The model will not be an exact representation of nature, but this should
not disturb us. Its utility, like that of other theories, will be measured by its ability to
assist us in understanding nature and in solving problems in the real world.

@

The role that probability plays in making inferences will be discussed in detail after
an adequate foundation has been laid for the theory of probability. At this point we
will present an elementary treatment of this theory through an example and an appeal
to your intuition.
The example selected is similar to that presented in Section 1.4 but simpler and
less practical. It was chosen because of the ease with which we can visualize the
population and sample and because it provides an observation-producing mechanism
for which a probabilistic model will be constructed in Section 2.3.
Consider a gambler who wishes to make an inference concerning the balance
of a die. The conceptual population of interest is the set of numbers that would be
generated if the die were rolled over and over again, ad infinitum. If the die were
perfectly balanced, one-sixth of the measurements in this population would be 1s,
one-sixth, 2s, one-sixth, 3s, and so on. The corresponding frequency distribution is
shown in Figure 2.1.
Using the scientific method, the gambler proposes the hypothesis that the die is
balanced, and he seeks observations from nature to contradict the theory, if false.

@

Finding the probability of an event defined on a sample space that contains a finite or
denumerable (countably infinite) set of sample points can be approached in two ways,
the sample-point and the event-composition methods. Both methods use the sample
space model, but they differ in the sequence of steps necessary to obtain a solution
and in the tools that are used. Separation of the two procedures may not be palatable
to the unity-seeking theorist, but it can be extremely useful to a beginner attempting to
find the probability of an event. In this section we consider the sample-point method.
The event-composition method requires additional results and will be presented in
Section 2.9

@

As our final topic in this chapter, we move from theory to application and examine
the nature of experiments conducted in statistics. A statistical experiment involves the
observation of a sample selected from a larger body of data, existing or conceptual,
called a population. The measurements in the sample, viewed as observations of the
values of one or more random variables, are then employed to make an inference
about the characteristics of the target population.
How are these inferences made? An exact answer to this question is deferred until
later, but a general observation follows from our discussion in Section 2.2. There we
learned that the probability of the observed sample plays a major role in making an
inference and evaluating the credibility of the inference.
Without belaboring the point, it is clear that the method of sampling will affect
the probability of a particular sample outcome. For example, suppose that a fictitious population contains only N = 5 elements, from which we plan to take a sample of
size n = 2. You could mix the elements thoroughly and select two in such a way that
all pairs of elements possess an equal probability of selection. A second sampling
procedure might require selecting a single element, replacing it in the population, and
then drawing a single element again. The two methods of sample selection are called
sampling without and with replacement, respectively.
If all the N = 5 population elements are distinctly different, the probability of
drawing a specific pair, when sampling without replacement, is 1/10. The probability
of drawing the same specific pair, when sampling with replacement, is 2/25. You can
easily verify these results.
The point that we make is that the method of sampling, known as the design of an
experiment, affects both the quantity of information in a sample and the probability of
observing a specific sample result. Hence, every sampling procedure must be clearly
described if we wish to make valid inferences from sample to population.
The study of the design of experiments, the various types of designs along with their
properties, is a course in itself. Hence, at this early stage of study we introduce only the
simplest sampling procedure, simple random sampling. The notion of simple random
sampling will be needed in subsequent discussions of the probabilities associated with
random variables, and it will inject some realism into our discussion of statistics. This
is because simple random sampling is often employed in practice. Now let us define
the term random sample.

@

Perfect random sampling is difficult to achieve in practice. If the population is not
too large, we might write each of the N numbers on a poker chip, mix all the chips,
and select a sample of n chips. The numbers on the poker chips would specify the
measurements to appear in the sample.
Tables of random numbers have been formed by computer to expedite the selection
of random samples. An example of such a table is Table 12, Appendix 3. A random
number table is a set of integers (0, 1, . . . , 9) generated so that, in the long run, the
table will contain all ten integers in approximately equal proportions, with no trends
in the patterns in which the digits were generated. Thus, if one digit is selected from
a random point on the table, it is equally likely to be any of the digits 0 through 9.
Choosing numbers from the table is analogous to drawing numbered poker chips
from the mixed pile, as mentioned earlier. Suppose we want a random sample of
three persons to be selected from a population of seven persons. We could number
the people from 1 to 7, put the numbers on chips, thoroughly mix the chips, and then
draw three out. Analogously, we could drop a pencil point on a random starting point
in Table 12, Appendix 3. Suppose the point falls on the 15th line of column 9 and we
decide to use the rightmost digit of the group of five, which is a 5 in this case. This
process is like drawing the chip numbered 5. We may now proceed in any direction to obtain the remaining numbers in the sample. If we decide to proceed down the page,
the next number (immediately below the 5) is a 2. So our second sampled person
would be number 2. Proceeding, we next come to an 8, but there are only seven
elements in the population. Thus, the 8 is ignored, and we continue down the column.
Two more 5s then appear, but they must both be ignored because person 5 has already
been selected. (The chip numbered 5 has been removed from the pile.) Finally, we
come to a 1, and our sample of three is completed with persons numbered 5, 2, and 1.
Any starting point can be used in a random number table, and we may proceed in
any direction from the starting point. However, if more than one sample is to be used
in any problem, each should have a unique starting point.
In many situations the population is conceptual, as in an observation made during
a laboratory experiment. Here the population is envisioned to be the infinitely many
measurements that would be obtained if the experiment were to be repeated over and
over again. If we wish a sample of n = 10 measurements from this population, we
repeat the experiment ten times and hope that the results represent, to a reasonable
degree of approximation, a random sample.
Although the primary purpose of this discussion was to clarify the meaning of a
random sample, we would like to mention that some sampling techniques are only
partially random. For instance, if we wish to determine the voting preference of the
nation in a presidential election, we would not likely choose a random sample from
the population of voters. By pure chance, all the voters appearing in the sample
might be drawn from a single city—say, San Francisco—which might not be at
all representative of the population of all voters in the United States. We would
prefer a random selection of voters from smaller political districts, perhaps states,
allotting a specified number to each state. The information from the randomly selected
subsamples drawn from the respective states would be combined to form a prediction
concerning the entire population of voters in the country. In general, we want to select
a sample so as to obtain a specified quantity of information at minimum cost.

@

This chapter has been concerned with providing a model for the repetition of an
experiment and, consequently, a model for the population frequency distributions of
Chapter 1. The acquisition of a probability distribution is the first step in forming a
theory to model reality and to develop the machinery for making inferences.
An experiment was defined as the process of making an observation. The concepts
of an event, a simple event, the samplespace,andtheprobabilityaxiomshaveprovided
a probabilistic model for calculating the probability of an event. Numerical events
and the definition of a random variable were introduced in Section 2.11.
Inherent in the model is the sample-point approach for calculating the probability
of an event (Section 2.5). Counting rules useful in applying the sample-point method
were discussed in Section 2.6. The concept of conditional probability, the operations
of set algebra, and the laws of probability set the stage for the event-composition
method for calculating the probability of an event (Section 2.9).
Of what value is the theory of probability? It provides the theory and the tools
for calculating the probabilities of numerical events and hence the probability

@

A less formidable characterization of discrete random variables can be obtained
by considering some practical examples. The number of bacteria per unit area in
the study of drug control on bacterial growth is a discrete random variable, as is the
number of defective television sets in a shipment of 100 sets. Indeed, discrete random
variables often represent counts associated with real phenomena.
Let us now consider the relation of the material in Chapter 2 to this chapter. Why
study the theory of probability? The answer is that the probability of an observed
event is needed to make inferences about a population. The events of interest are often
numerical events that correspond to values of discrete random variables. Hence, it is
imperative that we know the probabilities of these numerical events. Because certain
types of random variables occur so frequently in practice, it is useful to have at hand
the probability for each value of a random variable. This collection of probabilities is
called the probability distribution of the discrete random variable. We will find that
many experiments exhibit similar characteristics and generate random variables with
the same type of probability distribution. Consequently, knowledge of the probability
distributions for random variables associated with common types of experiments will
eliminate the need for solving the same probability problems over and over again.

@

If each of the ten people is selected at random from the population, then we have
ten nearly identical trials, with each trial resulting in a person either favoring Jones
(S) or not favoring Jones (F). The random variable of interest is then the number of
successes in the ten trials. For the first person selected, the probability of favoring
Jones (S) is .4. But what can be said about the unconditional probability that the
second person will favor Jones? In Exercise 3.35 you will show that unconditionally
the probability that the second person favors Jones is also .4. Thus, the probability of
a success S stays the same from trial to trial. However, the conditional probability of
a success on later trials depends on the number of successes in the previous trials. If
the population of voters is large, removal of one person will not substantially change
the fraction of voters favoring Jones, and the conditional probability that the second
person favors Jones will be very close to .4. In general, if the population is large and
the sample size is relatively small, the conditional probability of success on a later
trial given the number of successes on the previous trials will stay approximately
the same regardless of the outcomes on previous trials. Thus, the trials will be ap-
proximately independent and so sampling problems of this type are approximately
binomial.

@

If the sample size in Example 3.6 was large relative to the population size (say, 10%
of the population), the conditional probability of selecting a supporter of Jones on a
later selection would be significantly altered by the preferences of persons selected
earlier in the experiment, and the experiment would not be binomial. The hypergeo-
metric probability distribution, the topic of Section 3.7, is the appropriate probability
model to be used when the sample size is large relative to the population size.
You may wish to refine your ability to identify binomial experiments by reexamin-
ing the exercises at the end of Chapter 2. Several of the experiments in those exercises
are binomial or approximately binomial experiments.
The binomial probability distribution p(y) can be derived by applying the sample-
point approach to find the probability that the experiment yields y successes. Each
sample point in the sample space can be characterized by an n-tuple involving the

@

The parameters µ and σ are meaningful numerical descriptive measures that locate
the center and describe the spread associated with the values of a random variable
Y. They do not, however, provide a unique characterization of the distribution of Y.
Many different distributions possess the same means and standard deviations. We
now consider a set of numerical descriptive measures that (at least under certain
conditions) uniquely determine p(y).

@

Let us consider, however, the general idea which
most men have respecting what they call luck. We
shall find that what they regard as affording clear evidence
that there is such a thing as luck is in reality
the result of law. Nay, they adopt such a combination
of ideas about events which seem fortuitous that the
kind of evidence they obtain must have been obtained,
let events fall as they may.

@

Let us consider the ideas of men about luck inw
gambling, as typifying in small the ideas of nearly all
men about luck in life.

@

In the first place, gamblers recognise some men as
always lucky. I do not mean, of course, that they suppose
some men always win, but that some men never
have spells of bad luck. They are in the vein,
to use the phraseology of gamblers like Steinmetz and
others, who imagine that they have reduced their wild
and wandering notions about luck into a science.

@

Next, gamblers recognise those who start on a
gambling career with singular good luck, retaining that
luck long enough to learn to trust in it confidently, and
then losing it once for all, remaining thereafter constantly
unlucky.

@

Thirdly, gamblers regard the great bulk of their community
as men of varying luck-sometimes in the
vein sometimes not-men who, if they are to be
successful, must, according to the superstitions of the
gambling world, be most careful to watch the progress
of events. These, according to Steinmetz, the great
authority on all such questions, may
gamble or not, according as they are ready or not to
obey the dictates of gambling prudence. When they
are in the vein they should gamble steadily on; but so
soon as the maturity of the chances brings with it a
change of luck they must withdraw. If they will not
do this they are likely to join the crew of the unlucky.

@

Fourthly, there are those, according to the ideas of
gamblers, who are pursued by constant ill-luck. They
are never in the vein. If they win during the first
half of an evening, they lose more during the latter
half. But usually they lose all the time.

@

Fifthly, gamblers recognise a class who, having begun
unfortunately, have had a change of luck later, and
have become members of the lucky fraternity. This
change they usually ascribe to some action or event
which, to the less brilliant imaginations of outsiders,
would seem to have nothing whatever to do with the
gamblers luck. For instance, the luck changed when
the man married-his wife being a shrew; or because
he took to wearing white waistcoats; or because so-and-so,
who had been a sort of evil genius to the unlucky
man, had gone abroad or died; or for some equally preposterous
reason.

@

Then there are special classes of lucky or unlucky
men, or special peculiarities of luck, believed in by
individual gamblers, but not generally recognised.

@

Thus there are some who believe that they are lucky on
certain days of the week, and unlucky on certain other
days. The skilful whist-player who, under the name
Pembridge, deplores the rise of the system of signals
in whist play, believes that he is lucky for a spell of
five years, unlucky for the next five years, and so on
continually. Bulwer Lytton believed that he always
lost at whist when a certain man was at the same table,
or in the same room, or even in the same house. And
there are other cases equally absurd.

@

Now, at the outset, it is to be remarked that, if any
large number of persons set to work at any form of
gambling-card play, racing, or whatever else it may
be-their fortunes be such, let the individual
members of the company be whom they may, that they
will be divisible into such sets as are indicated above.
If the numbers are only large enough, not one of those
classes, not even the special classes mentioned at the
last, can fail to be represented.

@

Consider, for instance, the following simple illustrative
case.

@

Suppose a large number of persons-say, for instance,
twenty millions-engage in some game depending
wholly on chance, two persons taking part in each
game, so that there are ten million contests. Now, it is
obvious that, whether the chances in each contest are
exactly equal or not, exactly ten millions of the twenty
millions of persons will rise up winners and as many
will rise up losers, the game being understood to be of
such a kind that one player or the other must win. So
far, then, as the results of that first set of contests are
concerned, there will be ten million persons who will
consider themselves to be in luck.

@

Now, let the same twenty millions of persons engage
a second time in the same two-handed game, the pairs
of players being not the same as at the first encounter,
but distributed as chance may direct. Then there will
be ten millions of winners and ten millions of losers.
Again, if we consider the fortunes of the ten million
winners on the first night, we see that, since the chance
which, each one of these has of being again a winner is
equal to the chance he has of losing, one-half of
the winning ten millions of the first night will be winners
on the second night too. Nor shall we deduce a
wrong general result if, for convenience, we say 
one-half; so long as we are dealing with very large
numbers we know that this result must be near the
truth, and in chance problems of this sort we require
 no more. On this assumption, there
are at the end of the second contest five millions who
have won in both encounters, and five millions who have
won in the first and lost in the second. The other ten
millions, who lost in the first encounter, may similarly
be divided into five millions who lost also in the second,
and as many who won in the second. Thus, at the end
of the second encounter, there are five millions of
players who deem themselves lucky, as they have won
twice and not lost at all; as many who deem themselves
unlucky, having lost in both encounters; while ten
millions, or half the original number, have no reason
to regard themselves as either lucky or unlucky, having
won and lost in equal degree.

@

Extending our investigation to a third contest, we
find that, will be confirmed in their opinion
that they are very lucky, since they will have won in all
three encounters; while as many will have lost in all
three, and begin to regard themselves, and to be regarded
by their fellow-gamblers, as hopelessly unlucky.
Of the remaining fifteen millions of players, it will be
found that, will have won twice and lost once,
while as many will have lost twice and won once.
 Half of the fifteen millions will deem themselves
rather lucky, while the other half will deem
themselves rather unlucky. None, of course, can have
had even luck, since an odd number of games has been
played.

@

Our, players enter on a fourth series of
encounters. At its close there are found to be,
very lucky players, who have won in all four encounters,
and as many unlucky ones who have lost in all four.
Of the, players who had won in three encounters,
one-half lose in the fourth; they had been
deemed lucky, but now their luck has changed. So
with the, who had been thus far unlucky
one-half of them win on the fourth trial. We have
then, winners of three games out of four, and
, losers of three games out of four. Of the
, who had won two and lost one, one-half, or
,, win another game, and must be added to the
, just mentioned, making three million winners
of three games out of four. The other half lose the
fourth game, giving us, who have had equal
fortunes thus far, winning two games and losing two.
Of the other,, who had lost two and won one,
half win the fourth game, and so give, more
who have lost two games and won two thus in all we
have, who have had equal fortunes. The
others lose at the fourth trial, and give us, to
be added to the, already counted, who have
lost thrice and won once only.

@

At the close, then, of the fourth encounter, we find
a million and a quarter of players who have been constantly
lucky, and as many who have been constantly
unlucky. Five millions, having won three games out
of four, consider themselves to have better luck than
the average; while as many, having lost three games
out of four, regard themselves as unlucky. Lastly, we
have seven millions and a half who have won and lost
in equal degree. These, it will be seen, constitute the
largest part of our gambling community, though not
equal to the other classes taken together. They are, in
fact, three-eighths of the entire community.

@

So we might proceed to consider the twenty millions
of gamblers after a fifth encounter, a sixth, and so
on. Nor is there any difficulty in dealing with the
matter in that way. But a sort of account must be
kept in proceeding from the various classes considered
in dealing with the fourth encounter to those resulting
from the fifth, from these to those resulting from the
sixth, and so on. And although the accounts thus
requiring to be drawn up are easily dealt with, the
little sums would not present an appearance suited to these pages. I
therefore now proceed to consider only the results,
or rather such of the results as bear most upon my
subject.

@

After the fifth encounter there would be, persons who would have won
every game they had played, and as many who had lost
every game. These would represent the persistently
lucky and unlucky men of our gambling community.
There would be, who, having won four times in
succession, now lost, and as many who, having lost four
times in succession, now won. These would be the
examples of luck-good or bad-continued to a certain
stage, and then changing. The balance of our,,
amounting to seventeen millions and a half, would have
had varying degrees of luck, from those who had won
four games and lost one, to those
who had lost four games and won
but a single game. The bulk of the seventeen millions
and a half would include those who would have had no
reason to regard themselves as either specially lucky or
specially unlucky. But, of them would be
regarded as examples of a change of luck, being,
who had won the first three games and lost the remaining
two, and as many who had lost the first three games
and won the last two.

@

Thus, after the fifth game, there would be only
, of those regarded as persistently
lucky or unlucky, while there would be twice as many who would
be regarded by those who knew of their fortunes, and
of course by themselves, as examples of change of luck,
marked good or bad luck at starting, and then bad or
good luck.

@

So the games would proceed, half of the persistently
lucky up to a given game going out of that class at the
next game to become examples of a change of luck, so
that the number of the persistently lucky would rapidly
diminish as the play continued. So would the number
of the persistently unlucky continually diminish, half
going out at each new encounter to join the ranks of
those who had long been unlucky, but had at last experienced
a change of fortune.

@

After the twentieth game, if we suppose constant
exact halving to take place as far as possible, and then
to be followed by halving as near as possible, there
would be about a score who had won every game of the
twenty. No amount of reasoning would persuade these
players, or those who had heard of their fortunes, that
they were not exceedingly lucky persons-not in the
sense of being lucky because they won, but of
being at any time than any of those who
had taken part in the twenty games. They themselves
and their friends-ay, and their enemies too-would
conclude that they not lose. In like manner,
the score or so who had not won a single game out of
the twenty would be judged to be most unlucky persons,
whom it would be madness to back in any matter of
pure chance.

@

Yet-to pause for a moment on the case of these
apparently most manifest examples of persistent luck-the
result we have obtained has been to show that
inevitably there must be in a given number of trials
about a score of these cases of persistent luck, good or
bad, and about two score of cases where both good and
bad are counted together. We have shown that, without
imagining any antecedent luckiness, good or bad, there
must be what, to the players themselves, and to all who
heard of or saw what had happened to them, would
seem examples of the most marvellous luck. Supposing,
as we have, that the game is one of pure chance, so that
skill cannot influence it and cheating is wholly prevented,
all betting men would be disposed to say, These
twenty are persons whose good luck can be depended
on; we must certainly back them for the next game
and those other twenty are hopelessly unlucky; we may
lay almost any odds against their winning.

@

But it should hardly be necessary to say that that
which happen cannot be regarded as due to luck.
There must be set of twenty or so out of our twenty
millions who will win every game of twenty; and the
circumstance that this has befallen such and such persons
no more means that they are lucky, and is no more
a matter to be marvelled at, than the circumstance that
one person has drawn the prize ticket out of twenty
at a lottery is marvellous, or signifies that he would be
always lucky in lottery drawing.

@

The question whether those twenty persons who
had so far been persistently lucky would be better
worth backing than the rest of the twenty millions,
and especially than the other twenty who had persistently
lost, would in reality be disposed of at the
twenty-first trial in a very decisive way for of the
former score about half would lose, while of the latter
score about half would win. Among a thousand persons
who had backed the former set at odds there would
be a heavy average of loss; and the like among a thousand
persons who had laid against the latter set at
odds.

@

It may be said this is assertion only, that experience
shows that some men are lucky and others unlucky at
games or other matters depending purely on chance,
and it must be safer to back the former and to wager
against the latter. The answer is that the matter has
been tested over and over again by experience, with the
result that, as reasoning had shown, some men
are bound to be fortunate again and again in any
great number of trials, but that these are no more likely
to be fortunate on fresh trials than others, including
those who have been most unfortunate.

@

An objection will-about here-have vaguely presented
itself to believers in luck, viz. come off, greatly to the gratification
of believers in luck. In one case they could say,
I told you so, such luck as As was bound to pull him
through again; in the other, I told you so, such luck
was bound to change or if it were the loser of twenty
trials who was in question, then, I told you so, he was
bound to win at last; or, I told you so, such an unlucky
fellow was bound to lose. But unfortunately,
though the believers in luck thus run with the hare and
hunt with the hounds, though they are prepared to find
any and every event confirming their notions about luck,
yet when a score of trials or so are made, as in our supposed
case of a twenty-first game, the chances are that
they would be contradicted by the event. The twenty
constant winners would not be more lucky than the
twenty constant losers; but neither would they be less
lucky. The chances are that about half would win and
about half would lose. If one who really understands
the laws of probability could be supposed foolish enough
to wager money on either twenty, or on both, he
would unquestionably regard the betting as perfectly
even.

@

Let us return to the rest of our twenty millions of
players, though we need by no means consider all the
various classes into which they may be divided, for the
number of these classes amounts, in fact, to more than
a million.

@

The great bulk of the twenty millions would consist
of players who had won about as many games as they
had lost. The number who had won as many
games as they had lost would no longer form a large
proportion of the total, though it would form the largest
individual class. There would be nearly, of
these, while there would be about, who had
won eleven and lost nine, and as many who had won
nine and lost eleven; these two classes together would
outnumber the winners of ten games exactly, in the
proportion of to or thereabouts. Speaking generally,
it may be said that about two-thirds of the community
would consider they had had neither good luck nor
bad, though their opinion would depend on temperament
in part. For some men are more sensitive to losses than
to gains, and are ready to speak of themselves as unlucky,
when a careful examination of their varying fortunes
shows that they have neither won nor lost on the whole,
or have won rather more than they have lost. On the
other hand, there are some who are more exhilarated by
success than dashed by failure.

@

The number of those who, having begun with good
luck, had eventually been so markedly unfortunate,
would be considerable. It might be taken to include
all who had won the first six games and lost all the rest,
or who had won the first seven or the first eight, or any
number up to, say, the first fourteen, losing thence to
the end; and so estimated would amount to about,
an equal number being first markedly unfortunate, and
then constantly fortunate. But the number who had
experienced a marked change of luck would be much
greater if it were taken to include all who had
won a large proportion of the first nine or ten games
and lost a large proportion of the remainder, or 
. These two classes of players would 
be well represented.

@

Thus, then, we see that, setting enough persons
playing at any game of pure chance, and assuming
only that among any large number of players there
will be about as many winners as losers, irrespective of
luck, good or bad, all the five classes which gambling
folk recognise and regard as proving the existence of
luck, must inevitably make their appearance.

@

Even any special class which some believer in luck,
who was more or less fanciful, imagined he had recognised
among gambling folk, must inevitably appear
among our twenty millions of illustrative players. For
example, there would be about a score of players who
would have won the first game, lost the second, won
the third, and so on alternately to the end; and as
many who had also won and lost alternate games, but
had lost the first game; some forty, therefore, whose
fortune it seemed to be to win only after they had lost
and to lose only after they had won. Again, about
twenty would win the first five games, lose the next
five, win the third five, and lose the last five; and
about twenty more would lose the first five, win the
next, lose the third five, and win the last five about
forty players, therefore, who seemed bound to win and
lose always five games, and no more, in succession.

@

Again, if anyone had made a prediction that among
the players of the twenty games there would be one
who would win the first, then lose two, then win three,
then lose four, then win five, and then lose the remaining
five-and yet a sixth if the twenty-first game were
played-that prophet would certainly be justified by
the result. For about a score would be sure to have
just such fortunes as he had indicated up to the
twentieth game, and of these, nine or ten would be
 sure to win the twenty-first game also.

@

We see, then, that all the different kinds of luck-good,
bad, indifferent, or changing-which believers in
luck recognise, are bound to appear when any considerable
number of trials are made; and all the varied
ideas which men have formed respecting fortune and
her ways are bound to be confirmed.

@

It may be asked by some whether this is not proving
that there is such a thing as luck instead of over-throwing
the idea of luck. But such a question can
only arise from a confusion of ideas as to what is meant
by luck. If it be merely asserted that such and such
men have been lucky or unlucky, no one need dispute
the proposition; for among the millions of millions of
millions of purely fortuitous events affecting the millions
of persons now living, it could not but chance that
the most remarkable combinations, sequences, alternations,
and so forth, of events, lucky or unlucky, must
have presented themselves in the careers of hundreds.
Our illustrative case, artificial though it may seem, is
in reality not merely an illustration of life and its
chances, but may be regarded as legitimately demonstrating
what must inevitably happen on the wider
arena and amid the infinitely multiplied vicissitudes of
life. But the belief in luck involves much more. The
idea involved in it, if not openly expressed, is that some men are lucky by
nature, others unlucky, that such and such times and
seasons are lucky or unlucky, that the progress of
events may be modified by the lucky or unlucky influence
of actions in no way relating to them; as, for
instance, that success or failure at cards may be affected
by the choice of a seat, or by turning round thrice in
the seat. This form of belief in luck is not only akin
to superstition, it superstition. Like all superstition,
it is mischievous. It is, indeed, the very essence of the
gambling spirit, a spirit so demoralising that it blinds
men to the innate immorality of gambling. It is this
belief in luck, as something which can be relied on, or
propitiated, or influenced by such and such practices,
which is shown, by reasoning and experience alike, to
be entirely inconsistent not only with facts but with
possibility.

@

But oddly enough, the believers in luck show by
the form which their belief takes that in reality they
have no faith in luck any more than men really have
faith in superstitions which yet they allow to influence
their conduct. A superstition is an idle dread, or an
equally idle hope, not a real faith; and in like manner
is it with luck. A man will tell you that at cards, for
instance, he always has such and such luck; but if you
say, Let us have a few games to see whether you will
have your usual luck, you will usually find him unwilling
to let you apply the test. If you try it, and
the result is unfavourable, he argues that such peculiarities
of luck never do show themselves when submitted
to test. On the other hand, if it so chances
that on that particular occasion he has the kind of
luck which he claims to have, he expects you
to accept the evidence as decisive. Yet the result
means in reality only that certain events, the chances
for and against which were probably pretty equally
divided, have taken place.

@

So, if a gambler has the notion that turning round thrice in his
chair will change the luck, he is by no means corrected
of the superstition by finding the process fail on any
particular occasion. But if the bad luck which has
hitherto pursued him chances to be replaced by good or even by
moderate luck, after the gambler has gone through the
mystic process described, or some other equally absurd
and irrelevant manuvre, then the superstition is confirmed.
Yet all the time there is no real faith in it.
Such practices are like the absurd invocation of Indian
medicine men; there is a sort of vague hope that
something good may come of them, no real faith in
their efficacy.

@

The best proof of the utter absence of real faith in
superstitions about luck, even among gambling men,
the most superstitious of mankind, may be found in the
incongruity of their two leading ideas. If there are
two forms of expression more frequently than any
others in the mouth of gambling men, they are those
which relate to being in luck or out of luck on the one
hand, and to the idea that luck must change on the
other. Professional gamblers, like Steinmetz and his
kind, have become so satisfied that these ideas are
sound, whatever else may be unsound, in regard to
luck, that they have invented technical expressions to
present these theories of theirs, failing utterly to notice
that the ideas are inconsistent with each other, and
cannot both be right-though both may be wrong, and
are so.

@

A player is said to be in the vein when he has
for some time been fortunate. He should only go on
playing, if he is wise, at such a time, and at such a
time only should he be backed. Having been lucky he
is likely, according to this notion, to continue lucky.
But, on the other hand, the theory called the maturity
of the chances teaches that the luck cannot continue
more than a certain time in one direction; when it has
reached maturity in that direction it must change.
Therefore, when a man has been in the vein for a
certain time, it is unsafe to back him, for he must
be on the verge of a change of luck.

@

Of course the gambler is confirmed in his superstition,
whichever event may befall in such cases. When
he wins he applauds himself for following the luck, or
for duly anticipating a change of luck, as the case may
be; when he loses, he simply regrets his folly in not
seeing that the luck must change, or in not standing
by the winner.

@

And with regard to the idea that luck must change,
and that in the long run events must run even, it is
noteworthy how few gambling men recognise either, on
the one hand, how inconsistent this idea is with their
belief in luck which may be trusted, or, on the other hand, the real
way in which luck comes even after a sufficiently
long run.

@

A man who has played long with success goes on
because he regards himself as lucky. A man who has
played long without success goes on because he considers
that the luck is bound to change. The latter goes on
with the idea that, if he only plays long enough, he
must at least at some time or other recover his losses.

@

Now there can be no manner of doubt that if a man,
possessed of sufficient means, goes on playing for a very
long time, his gains and losses will eventually be very
nearly equal; assuming always, of course, that he is not
swindled-which, as we are dealing with gambling
men, is perhaps a sufficiently bold assumption. Yet it
by no means follows that, if he starts with considerable
losses, he will ever recover the sum he has thus had to
part with, or that his losses may not be considerably
increased. This sounds like a paradox; but in reality
the real paradox lies in the opposite view.

@

This may be readily shown.

@

The idea to be controverted is this that if a gambler
plays long enough there must come a time when
his gains and his losses are exactly balanced. Of
course, if this were true, it would be a very strong
argument against gambling; for what but loss of time
can be the result of following a course which must
inevitably lead you, if you go on long enough, to the
place from which you started? But it is not true. If
it were true, of course it involves the inference that, no
matter when you enter on a course of gambling, you
are bound after a certain time to find yourself where
you were at that beginning. It follows that if you lose considerably in the first
few weeks or months of your gambling career, then, if
you only play long enough you must inevitably find
yourself as great a loser, on the whole, as you were when
you were thus in arrears through gambling losses; for
your play may be quite as properly considered to have
begun when those losses had just been incurred, as to
have begun at any other time. Hence this idea that,
in the long run, the luck must run even, involves the
conclusion that, if you are a loser or a gainer in the
beginning of your play, you must at some time or other
be equally a gainer or loser. This is manifestly inconsistent
with the idea that long-continued play will
inevitably leave you neither a loser nor a gainer. If,
starting from a certain point when you are a thousand
pounds in arrears, you are certain some time or other,
if you only play long enough, to have gained back that
thousand pounds, it is obvious that you are equally
certain some time or other 
to be yet another thousand pounds in arrears.
For there is no line of argument to prove you must
regain it, which will not equally prove that some time
or other you must be a loser by that same amount, over
and above what you had already lost when beginning
the games which were to put you right. If, then, you
are to come straight, you must be able certainly to
recover two thousand pounds, and by parity of reasoning
four thousand, and again twice that; and so on 
 which is manifestly absurd.

@

The real fact is, that while the laws of probabilities
do undoubtedly assure the gambler that his losses and
gains will in the long run be nearly equal, the kind of
equality thus approached is not an equality of actual
amount, but of proportion. If two men keep on tossing
for sovereigns, it becomes more and more unlikely,
the longer they toss, that the difference between them
will fall short of any given sum. If they go on till
they have tossed twenty million times, the odds are
heavily in favour of one or the other being a loser of at
least a thousand pounds. But the proportion of the
amount won by one altogether, to the amount won altogether
by the other, is almost certain to be very nearly
a proportion of equality. Suppose, for example, that at
the end of twenty millions of tossings, one player is a
winner of then he must have won in all
 the other having won in all 
the ratio of these amounts is that of to,
or to This is very nearly the ratio of
 to, or is scarcely distinguishable, practically,
from actual equality. Now if these men had only
tossed eight times for sovereigns, it might very well
have happened that one would have won five or six
times, while the other had only won thrice or twice.
Yet with a ratio of to, or to, against the loser,
he would actually be out of pocket only in one case
and in the other; while in the other case, with a
ratio of almost perfect equality, he would be the loser
of a thousand pounds.

@

But now it might appear that, after all, this is
proving too much, or, at any rate, proves as much on
one side as on the other; for if one player loses the
other must gain; if a certain set of players lose the
rest gain and it might seem as though, with the prevalent
ideas of many respecting gambling games, the
chance of winning were a sufficient compensation for
the chance of losing.

@

Where a man is so foolish that the chance of having
more money than he wants is equivalent in his mind
 to the risk of being
deprived of the power of getting what is necessary for
himself and for his family, such reasoning may be
regarded as convincing. For those who weigh their
wants and wishes rightly, it has no value whatever.
On the contrary it may be shown that every wager or
gambling transaction, by a man of moderate means,
definitely reduces the actual value of his possessions,
even if the wager or transaction be a fair one. If a
man who has a hundred pounds available to meet his
present wants wagers against, or an equal
chance, he is no longer worth He, when
the bet is decided, be worth, or he may be worth
only All he can his property at is about
. Supposing the other man to be in the same position,
they are both impoverished as soon as they have
made the bet; and when the wager is decided, the
average value of their possessions in ready money is less
than it was; for the winner gains less by having his
. raised to, than the
loser suffers by having his ready money halved.

@

Similar remarks apply to participation in lottery
schemes, or the various forms of gambling at places
like San Carlo. Every sum wagered means, at the
moment when it is staked, a depreciation of the gamblers
property; and would mean that, even if the terms
on which the wagering were conducted were strictly fair.
But this is never the case. In all lotteries and in all
established systems of gambling certain odds are always
retained in favour of those who work the lottery or
the gambling system. These odds make gambling in
either form still more injurious to those who take part
in it. Winners of course there are, and in some few
cases winners may retain a large part of their gains, or
at any rate expend them otherwise than in fresh gambling.
Yet it is manifest that, apart from the circumstance
that the of the gambling gains of one set
of persons never counterbalance the of the gambling
losses of others, there is always a large deduction
to be made on account of the wild and reckless waste
of money won by gambling. In many cases, indeed,
large gambling gains have brought ruin to the unfortunate
winner set on horseback by lightly acquired
wealth, and unaccustomed to the position, he has ridden
straightway to the devil.

@

But the greed for chance-won wealth is so great
among men of weak minds, and they are so large a
majority of all communities, that the bait may be
dangled for them without care to conceal the hook. In
all lotteries and gambling systems which have yet been
known the hook has been patent, and the evil it must
do if swallowed should have been obvious. Yet it has
been swallowed greedily.

@

A most remarkable illustration of the folly of those
who trust in luck, and the cool audacity of those who
trust in such folly, with more reason but with more
rascality, is presented by the Louisiana Lottery in
America. This is the only lottery of the kind now
permitted in America. Indeed, it is nominally restricted
to the State of Louisiana; but practically the whole
country takes part in it, tickets being obtainable by
residents in every State of the Union. The peculiarity
of the lottery is The
advertisements announce that each month,
tickets will be sold, each at five dollars, shares of one-fifth
being purchasable at one dollar. Two commissioners-Generals
Early and Beauregard-control the
drawings; so that we are told, and may well believe,
the drawings are conducted with fairness and honesty,
and in good faith to all parties. So far all is well. We
see that each month, if all the tickets are sold, the sum
of, dols and taking the sum of thus collected, were to
say The lottery, gentlemen gamblers, will now proceed;
. of the sum before me I will distribute in
prizes, as follows ; the rest, this sum of,
which I have here separated, I will put into my own
pocket for my trouble
in getting up this lottery? The Louisiana Lottery is
a transaction of the same rascally type-not rendered
more respectable by being on a very much larger scale.
If the spirit of rash speculation will let men submit
to swindling so gross as this, we can scarcely see any
limit to its operation. Yet hundreds of thousands yield
to the temptation thus offered, to gain suddenly a large
sum, at the expense of a small sum almost certainly lost,
and partly stolen.

@

It should be known-though, perhaps, even this
knowledge would not keep the moths away from the
destruction to which they seem irresistibly lured-that
gambling carried on long enough is not probable but
certain ruin. There is no sum, however large, which is
not certain to be absorbed at some time in the continuance
of a sufficiently long series of trials, even at fair
risks. Gamblers with moderate fortunes overlook this.
In their idea, mistaken as it is, that luck must run even
at last, they forget that, before that last to which they
look has been reached, their last shilling may have
gone. If they were content even to stay till-possibly-gain
balanced loss, there would be some chance of escape.
But what real gambler ever was content with such an
aim as that? Luck must not only turn till loss has
been recouped, but run on till great gains have been
made. And no gambler was ever yet content to stay
his hand when winning, or to give up when he began
to lose again. The fatal faith in eventual good luck is
the source of all bad luck; it is in itself the worst luck
of all. Every gambler has this faith, and no gambler
who holds to it is likely long to escape ruin.

@



@

It might be supposed that those who are most familiar
with the actual results which present themselves in long
series of chance games would form the most correct
views respecting the conditions on which such results
depend-would be, in fact, freest from all superstitious
ideas respecting chance or luck. The gambler who
sees every system-his own infallible system included-foiled
by the run of events, who witnesses the discomfiture
of one gamester after another that for a time
had seemed irresistibly lucky, and who can number by
hundreds those who have been ruined by the love of
play, might be expected to recognise the futility of all
attempts to anticipate the results of chance combinations.
It is, however, but too well known that the
reverse is the case. The more familiar a man becomes
with the multitude of such combinations, the more
confidently he believes in the possibility of foretelling-not,
indeed, any special event, but-the general run
of several approaching events. There has never been a
successful gambler who has not believed that his success
 has been the result of
skilful conduct on his own part; and there has never been
a ruined gambler who has not believed that when
ruin overtook him he was on the very point of mastering
the secret of success. It is this fatal confidence which
gives to gambling its power of fascinating the lucky as
well as the unlucky. The winner continues to tempt
fortune, believing all the while that he is exerting
some special aptitude for games of chance, until the
inevitable change of luck arrives; and thereafter he
continues to play because he believes that his luck has
only deserted him for a time, and must presently return.
The unlucky gambler, on the contrary, regards his
losses as sacrifices to ensure the ultimate success of his
system, and even when he has lost his all, continues
firm in the belief that had he had more money to
sacrifice he could have bound fortune to his side for
ever.

@

I propose to consider some of the most common
gambling superstitions-noting, at the same time, that
like superstitions prevail respecting chance events even among those who never
gamble.

@

Houdin, in his interesting book, voil, has given some amusing instances of
the fruits of long gaming experience. They are presented,
says Steinmetz, from whose work,, I quote them, as the axioms of a professional
gambler and cheat. Thus we might expect that,
however unsatisfactory to men of honest mind, they
would at least savour of a certain sort of wisdom. Yet
these axioms, the fruit of long study directed by self-interest,
are all utterly untrustworthy.

@

Every game of chance, says this authority, presents
two kinds of chances that are very distinct-namely,
those relating to the person interested, that is
the player; and those inherent in the combinations of
the game. That is, we are to distinguish between the
chances proper to the game, and those depending on the
luck of the player. Proceeding to consider the chances
proper to the game itself, our friendly cheat sums them
all up in two rules. First-Though chance can bring
into the game all possible combinations, there are nevertheless
certain limits at which it seems to stop such,
for instance, as a certain number turning up ten times
in succession at roulette; this is possible, but it has
never happened. Secondly-In a game of chance, the
oftener the same combination has occurred in succession,
the nearer we are to the certainty that it will not
recur at the next cast or turn up. This is the most
elementary of the theories on probabilities; it is termed
 . Hence, he proceeds, a player must
come to the table not only in luck, but he must not
risk his money except at the instant prescribed by the
rules of the maturity of the chances. Then follow the
precepts for personal conduct-For gaming prefer
roulette, because it presents several ways of staking
your money-which permits the study of several. A
player should approach the gaming-table perfectly calm
and cool-just as a merchant or tradesman in treaty
about any affair. If he gets into a passion it is all
over with prudence, all over with good luck-for the
demon of bad luck invariably pursues a passionate
player. Every man who finds a pleasure in playing
runs the risk of losing. admission would appear, as we shall presently see,
to have been the fruit of genuine experience on our gamblers part
it only requires that, for the words runs the risk, we should read
incurs the certainty, to be incontrovertible.
A prudent player, before
undertaking anything, should put himself to the test to
discover if he is in vein or in luck. In all doubt
he should abstain. There are several persons who are
constantly pursued by bad luck to such I say-. Stubbornness at play is ruin. Remember that
Fortune does not like people to be overjoyed at her
favours, and that she prepares bitter deceptions for the
imprudent who are intoxicated by success. Lastly,
before risking your money at play, study your vein,
and the different probabilities of the game-termed, as
aforesaid, the maturity of the chances.

@

Before proceeding to exhibit the fallacy of the principles
here enunciated-principles which have worked
incalculable mischief-it may be well to sketch the
history of the scamp who enunciated them-so far, at
least, as his gambling successes are concerned. His
first meeting with Houdin took place at a subscription
ball, where he managed to fleece Houdin and
others to a considerable amount, contriving a dexterous
escape when detected. Houdin afterwards fell in with
him at Spa, where he found the gambler in the greatest
poverty, and lent him a small sum-to practise his
grand theories. This sum the gambler lost, and
Houdin advised him to take up a less dangerous occupation.
It was on this occasion, it would seem, that
the gambler revealed to Houdin the particulars recorded
in his book. A year afterwards Houdin unexpectedly
fell in with him again; but this time the
fellow was transformed into what is called a,
having succeeded to a large fortune on
the death of his brother who died intestate. According
to Houdin, the following was the mans declaration
at the auspicious meeting I have, he said, completely
renounced gaming; I am rich enough; and
care no longer for fortune. And yet, he added proudly,
if I now cared for the thing, how I could break those
bloated banks in their pride, and what a glorious
vengeance I could take of bad luck and its inflexible
agents! But my heart is too full of my happiness to
allow the smallest place for the desire of vengeance.
Three years later he died; and Houdin informs us that
he left the whole of his fortune to various charitable
institutions, his career after his acquisition of wealth
going far to demonstrate the justice of Becky Sharps
theory that it is easy to be honest on five thousand a
year.

@

It is remarkable that the principles enunciated above
are not merely erroneous, but self-contradictory. Yet
it is to be noticed that though they are presented as
the outcome of a life of gambling experiences, they
are in reality entertained by all gamblers, however
limited their experience, as well as by many who are
only prevented by the lack of opportunity from entering
the dangerous path which has led so many to
ruin. These contradictory superstitions may be called
severally-the gamblers belief in his own good luck,
and his faith in the turn of luck. When he is considering
his own fortune he does not hesitate to believe
that on the whole the Fates will favour him, though
this belief implies in reality the of favourable
conditions. On the contrary, when he is considering
the fortunes of others who are successful in their play
against him, he does not doubt that their good luck
will presently desert them, that is, he believes in the
 of favourable conditions in their case.

@

Taking in their order the gambling superstitions
which have been presented above, we have, first of all,
to inquire what truth there is in the idea that there
are limits beyond which pure chance has no power of
introducing peculiar combinations. Let us consider
this hypothesis in the light of actual experience. Mr.
Steinmetz tells us that, in, a Mr. Ogden wagered
, guineas to one that seven would not be thrown
with a pair of dice ten successive times. The wager
was accepted, and
strange to say his opponent threw seven At this point Mr. Ogden offered guineas
to be off the bet. But his opponent declined . He cast yet once more, and threw nine, so
that Mr. Ogden won his guinea.

@

Now here we have an instance of a most remarkable
series of throws, the like of which has never been
recorded before or since. Before those throws had
been made, it might have been asserted that the
throwing of nine successive sevens with a pair of
dice was a circumstance which chance could never
bring about, for experience was as much against such
an event as it would seem to be against the turning up
of a certain number ten successive times at
Yet experience now shows that the thing is possible;
and if we are to limit the action of chance, we must
assert that the throwing of seven times in succession
is an event which will never happen. Yet such
a conclusion obviously rests on as unstable a basis as
the former, of which experience has disposed. Observe,
however, how the two gamblers viewed this very eventuality.
Nine successive sevens had been thrown;
and if there were any truth in the theory that the
power of chance was limited, it might have been regarded
as all but certain that the next throw would
not be a seven. But a run of bad fortune had so
shaken Mr. Ogdens faith in his luck that he was
ready to pay guineas in order to
save his endangered thousand; and so confident was
his opponent that the run of luck would continue that
he declined this very favourable offer. Experience had
in fact shown both the players, that although sevens
could not be thrown for ever, yet there was no saying
when the throw would change. Both reasoned probably
that as an eighth throw had followed seven successive
throws of seven, and as a ninth
had followed eight successive throws, a tenth might well follow the nine . They were forced as it were by the run of events
to reason justly as to the possibility of a tenth throw
of seven-nay, to exaggerate that possibility into
probability; and it appears from the narrative that the
strange series of throws quite checked the betting propensities
of the bystanders, and that not one was led to
lay the wager that the tenth
throw would not give seven.

@

We have spoken of the unfairness of the original
wager. It may interest our readers to know exactly
how much should have been wagered against a single
guinea, that ten sevens would not be thrown. With
a pair of dice there are thirty-six possible throws, and
six of these give seven as the total. Thus the chance
of throwing seven is one sixth, and the chance of
throwing seven ten times running is obtained by
multiplying six into itself ten times, and placing the
resulting number under unity, to represent the minute
fractional chance required. It will be found that the
number thus obtained is,, and instead
of, guineas, fairness required that,
guineas should have been wagered against one guinea,
so enormous are the chances against the occurrence of
ten successive throws of seven. Even against nine
successive throws the fair odds would have been
, to one, or about forty thousand guineas to
a farthing. But when the nine throws of seven had
been made, the chance of a tenth throw of seven was
simply one-sixth as at the first trial. If there were
any truth in the theory of the maturity of the chances,
the chance of such a throw would of course be greatly
diminished. But even taking the mathematical value
of the chance, Mr. Ogden need in fairness only have
offered a sixth part of, guineas, or guineas, to be off his wager.
So that his opponent accepted in the first instance an
utterly unfair offer, and refused in the second instance a
sum exceeding by more than three hundred guineas the
real value of his chance.

@

Closely connected with the theory about the range
of possibility in the matter of chance combinations, is
the theory of the maturity of the chances-the most
elementary of the theories on probabilities. It might
safely be termed the most mischievous of gambling
superstitions.

@

As an illustration of the application of this theory,
we may cite the case of an Englishman, once well
known at foreign gambling-tables, who had based a
system on a generalisation of this theory. In point of
fact the theory asserts that when there has been a run
in favour of any particular event, the chances in favour
of the event are reduced, and therefore, necessarily,
the chances in favour of other events are increased.
Now our Englishman watched the play at the 
table for two full hours, carefully noting the numbers
which came up during that time. Then, eschewing
those numbers which had come up oftenest, he staked
his money on those which had come up very seldom or
not at all. Here was an infallible system according
to the most elementary of the theories of probability.
The tendency of chance-results to right themselves, so
that events equally likely in the first instance will
occur an equal number of times in the long run, was
called into action to enrich our gambler and to ruin
the unlucky bankers. Be it noted, in passing, that
events do thus right themselves, though this circumstance
does not operate quite as the gambler supposed,
and cannot be trusted to put a penny into any ones
pocket. The system was tried, however, and instead
of reasoning respecting its soundness, we may content
ourselves with recording the result. On the first day
our Englishman won more than seven hundred pounds
in a single hour. His exultation was boundless. He
thought he had really discovered the philosophers
stone. Off he went to his bankers, and transmitted
the greater portion of his winnings to London. The
next day he played and lost fifty pounds; and the
following day he achieved the same result, and had to
write to town for remittances. In fine, in a week he
had lost all the money he won at first, with the
exception of fifty pounds, which he reserved to take
him home; and being thoroughly convinced of the
exceeding fickleness of fortune, he has never staked a
sixpence since, and does all in his power to dissuade
others from playing.

@

He took a very sound principle of probabilities as
the supposed basis of his system, though in reality he
entirely mistook the nature of the principle. That
principle is, that where the chances for one or another
of two results are equal for each trial, and many trials
are made, the number of events of one kind will bear to
those of the other kind a very nearly equal ratio the
greater the number of events, the more nearly will the
ratio tend to equality. This is perfectly true; and
nothing could be safer than to wager on this principle.
Let a man toss a coin for an hour, and I would wager
confidently that neither will heads exceed tails, or
tails exceed heads in a greater ratio than that of
 to Let him toss for a day, and I would wager
as confidently that the inequality will not be greater
than that represented by the ratio of to Let
the tossing be repeated day after day for a year, and I
would wager my life that the disproportion will be less
than that represented by the ratio of, to 
Yet so little does this principle bear the interpretation
placed upon it by the inventor of the system above
described, that if on any occasion during this long-continued
process of tossings head had been tossed no less than twenty times in
succession, I would not wager a sixpence on the next
tossing giving tail, or trust a sixpence to the chance of
tail appearing oftener than head in the next five, ten,
or twenty tossings. Not only should reason show the
utter absurdity of supposing that a tossing, or a set of
five, ten, or twenty tossings, can be affected one way or
the other by past tossings, whether proximate or remote;
but the experiment has been tried, and it has appeared
 that after any
number of cases in which heads have appeared
such and such a number of times in succession, the next
tossing has given heads as often as it has given tails.
Thus, in cases, Buffon, in his famous tossing trial,
tossed tails four times running. On the next trial,
in these cases, head came times and tail 
times. So most certainly the tossing of tail four
times running had not diminished the tendency towards
tail being tossed. Among the cases which had
thus given tail five times running, failed to give
another tail, while the remaining gave another,
that is, a sixth tail. Of these, failed to give
another tail, while gave a seventh tail; and here
it might seem we have evidence of the effect of preceding
tosses. The disproportion is considerable, and
even to the mathematician the case is certainly curious;
but in so many trials such curiosities may always be
noticed. That it will not bear the interpretation put
upon it is shown by the next steps. Of the cases,
 failed to give another tail, while the remaining six
gave another, that is, an eighth tail; and these
numbers eight and six are more nearly equal than the
preceding numbers and ; so that the tendency to
change had certainly not increased at this step. However,
the numbers are too small in this part of the experiment
to give results which can be relied upon.
The cases in which the numbers were large prove unmistakably,
what reason ought to have made self-evident,
that past events of pure chance cannot in the
slightest degree affect the result of sequent trials.

@

To suppose otherwise is, indeed, utterly to ignore
the relation between cause and effect. When anyone
asserts that because such and such things have happened,
therefore such and such other events will happen, he
ought at least to be able to show that the past events
have some direct influence on those which are thus said
to be affected by them. But if I am going to toss a
coin perfectly at random, in what possible way can the
result of the experiment be affected by the circumstance
that during ten or twelve minutes before, I tossed head
only or tail only?

@

The system of which I now propose to speak is more
plausible, less readily put to the full test, and consequently
far more dangerous than the one just described.
In it, as in the other, reliance is placed on a change
after a run of any kind, but not in the same way.

@

Everyone is familiar with the method of renewing
wagers on the terms double or quits. It is a very
convenient way of getting rid of money which has been
won on a wager by one who does not care for wagering,
and, not being to the manner born, does not feel comfortable
in pocketing money won in this way. You
have rashly backed some favourite oarsman, let us say,
or your college boat, or the like, for a level sovereign,
not caring to win, but accepting a challenge to so wager
rather than seem to want faith in your friend, college,
or university. You thus find yourself suddenly the
recipient of a coin to which you feel you are about as
much entitled as though you had abstracted it from the
other bettors pocket. You offer him double or quits,
tossing the coin. Perhaps he loses, when you would be
entitled to two sovereigns. You repeat the offer, and if
he again loses,
you again repeat it, until at last he wins the toss. Then
you are quits, and can be happy again.

@

The system of winning money corresponds to this
safe system of getting rid of money which has been
uncomfortably won. Observe that if you only go on
long enough with the double-or-quits method, as above,
you are sure to get rid of your sovereign; for your
friend cannot go on losing for ever. He might, indeed,
lose nine or ten times running, when he would owe you
. or and if he then lost heart, while yet he
regarded his loss, like his first wager, as a debt of honour
from which you could not release him, matters would
be rather awkward. If he lost twenty times he would
owe you a million, which would be more awkward still;
except that, having gone so far, he could not make
matters worse by going a little farther; and in a few
more tossings you would get rid of your millions as
completely as of the sovereign first won. Still, speaking
generally, this double-or-quits method is a sure and
easy way of clearing such scores. But it may be reversed
and become a pretty sure and easy way of making
money.

@

Suppose a man, whom we will call A, to wager with
another, B, one sovereign on a tossing . If he
wins, he gains a sovereign. Suppose, however, he loses
his sovereign. Then let him make a new wager of two
sovereigns. If he wins, he is the gainer of one sovereign
in all if he loses, he has lost three in all. In the latter
case let him make a new wager, of four sovereigns. If
he wins, he gains one sovereign; if he loses, he has
lost seven in all. In this last case let him wager
eight sovereigns. Then, if he wins, he has gained one
sovereign, and if he loses he has lost fifteen. Wagering
sixteen sovereigns in the latter case, he gains one in all
if he wins, and has lost thirty-one in all if he loses. So
he goes on doubling
his wager continually, until at last he wins. Then he
has gained one sovereign. He can now repeat the
process, gaining each time a sovereign whenever he
wins a tossing. And manifestly in this way A can
most surely and safely win every sovereign B has. Yet
every wager has been a perfectly fair one. We seem,
then, to see our way to a safe way of making any
quantity of money. B, of course, would not allow this
sort of wagering to go on very long. But the bankers
of a gambling establishment undertake to accept any
wagers which may be offered, on the system of their
game, whether, roulette, or what not,
between certain limits of value in the stakes. Say these
limits are from to, as I am told is not uncommonly
the case. A man may wager on this plan,
and double eight times before his doublings carry the
stake above Or with more advantage he may let
the successive stakes be such that the eighth doubling
will make the maximum sum, or; so that the
stakes in inverse order will be,,

, and, lastly,
. nine stakes, or eight doublings in all. It is so
utterly unlikely, says the believer in this system, that
where the chances are practically equal on two events,
the same event will be repeated nine times running,
that I may safely apply this method, gaining at each
venture,
until at last I shall accumulate in this way a small
fortune, which in time will become a large fortune.

@

The proprietors of gambling houses naturally encourage
this pleasing delusion. They call this power of
varying the stakes a very important advantage possessed
by the player at such tables. They say, truly enough,
a single player would not wager if the stakes could be
varied in this manner, and he possessed no power of refusing
any offer between such limits. Since a single
player would refuse to allow this arrangement, it is
manifest the arrangement is a privilege. Being a
privilege, it is worth paying for. It is on this account
that we poor bankers, who oblige those possessed of
gambling propensities by allowing them to exercise
their tastes that way, must have a certain small percentage
of odds in our favour. Thus at 
we really must have one of the refaits allowed us, say
the first, the, though any other would suit
us equally well but even then we do not win what is
on the table; the may go against us, when the
players save their stakes, and if we win we only win
what has been staked on one colour, and so forth.

@

Those who like gambling, too, and so like to believe
that the bankers are strictly fair, adopt this argument.
Thus the editor of says The
Table at all games has an extra chance, a chance varying
from one zero at one table to two at another; that is a
chance every player understands when he sits down to
play, That this
advantage over a long series must tell is as certain as
that two and two make four. But.... the bank
does not always win; on the contrary, we often hear
of the bank being broken and closed until more cash is
forthcoming. The number of times the bank loses
and nothing is said about it, would amount to a considerable
number of times in the course of a year. A
small percentage on one side or the other, extended over
a long enough series, will tell; but on a single event
the difference in the gamblers eyes is small. For that percentage the punter is
enabled to vary his stakes from say, to Without
some such advantage, no one would permit his
adversaries thus to vary the stakes. The punter is willing to pay for this advantage.

@

And all the while the truth is that the supposed
advantage is no advantage at all-at least, to the player.
It is of immense advantage to the bankers, because it
encourages so many to play who otherwise might refrain.
But in reality the bankers would make the same winnings
if every stake were of a fixed amount, say,
as when the stakes can be varied-always assuming
that as many players would come to them, and play as
freely, as on the present more attractive system.

@

Let us consider the actual state of the case, when a
player at a table doubles his stakes till he wins-repeating
the process from the lowest stakes after each
success.

@

But first-or rather, as a part of this inquiry-let
us consider why our imaginary player B would decline
to allow A to double wagers in the manner described.
In reality, of course, As power of doubling is limited
by the amount of As money, or of his available money
for gambling. He cannot go on doubling the stakes
when he has paid away more than half his money.
Suppose, for instance, he has in notes and
or so in sovereigns. But if he loses his last
wager he will have paid away and must stop for
the time, leaving B the gainer of that sum. This is a
very unlikely result for a single trial. It would not be
likely to happen in a hundred or in two hundred trials,
though it might happen at the first trial, or at a very
early one. Even if it happened after five hundred
trials, A would only have won in those, and B
winning at the last, would have much the better
of the encounter.

@

Why, then, would not B be willing to wager on
these terms? For precisely the same reason that he should be
unwilling to pay for one ticket out of, where
the prize was Each ticket would be fairly worth
that sum. And many foolish persons, as we know, are
willing to pay in that way for a ticket in a lottery, even
paying more than the correct value. But no one of any
sense would throw away a sovereign for the chance of winning a thousand
pounds. That, really, is what B declines to do. Every
venture he makes with A is a wager on just such terms. B wins
nothing unless he wins he loses at each
failure His chance of winning, too, is the same, at
each venture, as that of drawing a single marked ticket
from a bag containing, tickets. Each venture,
though it may be decided at the first or second tossing,
is a venture of ten tossings. Now, with ten tossings
there are, possible results, any one of which is as
likely as any other. One of these, and one only, is
favourable to B, viz though, in reality, he does
not pay the pound until the venture is decided against
him; so that, if he wins, he receives corresponding
 to the total just named.

@

Now, to wager a pound in this way, for the chance
of winning would be very foolish; and though
continually repeating the experiment would in the long
run make the number of successes bear the right proportion
to the number of failures, yet B might be
ruined long before this happened, though quite as probably
A would be ruined. Bs ruin, if effected, would
be brought about by steadily continued small losses, As
by a casual but overwhelming loss. The richer B and
A were, the longer it would be before one or other was
ruined, though the eventual ruin of one or other would
be certain. If one was much richer than the other, his
chance of escaping ruin would be so much the greater,
and so much greater, therefore, the risk of the poorer.
In other words, the odds would be great in favour of the
richer of the two, whether A or B, absorbing the whole
property of the other, if wagering on this plan were
continued steadily for a long time.

@

Now, if we extend such considerations as these to
the case in which an individual player contends against
a bank, we shall see that, even without any percentage
on the chances, the odds would be largely in favour of
the bank. If the player is persistent in applying his
system, he is practically certain to be ruined. For it is
to be noticed that in such a system the player is exposed
to that which he can least afford, namely, sudden and
great loss; it is by such losses that his ruin will be
brought about if at all. On the other hand, the bank,
which can best afford such losses, has to meet only
a steady slow drain upon its resources, until the inevitable
 comes which restore all that had been thus
drained out, and more along with it. If the player
were even to carry on his system in the manner which
my reasoning has really implied; if, as he made his
small gain at each venture, he set it by to form a reserve
fund-even then his ruin would be inevitable in the
long run. But every one knows that gamblers do
nothing of the sort. Lightly come, lightly go, is their
rule, so far as their gains are concerned. [In another
sense, their rule is, lightly come 
and heavily go when the last pound has been staked and
lost.] Thus they run a risk which, in their way of
playing, amounts almost to a certainty of ruining themselves,
and they do not even take the precaution which
would alone give them their one small, almost evanescent
chance of escape. On the other hand, the bankers,
who are really playing an almost perfectly safe game,
leave nothing to chance. The bulk of the money gained
by them is reserved to maintain the balance necessary
for safety. Only the actual profits of their system-the
percentage of gain due to their percentage on the chances-is
dealt with as income; that is, as money to be spent.

@

It is true that in one sense the case between the
bankers and the public resembles that of a player with
a small capital against a player with a large capital;
the bankers have indeed a large capital, but it is small
compared with that of the public at large who frequent
the gaming-tables. But, in the first place, this
does not at all help any single player. It is all but
certain that the public will not be ruined as a whole, just as it
is all but certain that the whole of an army engaged in
a campaign, even under the most unfavourable circumstances,
will not be destroyed if recruits are always
available at short notice. Now, if the circumstances of
a campaign are such that each individual soldier runs
exceeding risk of being killed, it will not improve the
chances of any single soldier that the army as a whole
will not be destroyed; and in like manner those who
gamble persistently are not helped in their ruin by the
circumstance that, as one is pushed from the board,
others ever succeed. Even the chance of the bank
being ruined, however, is not favourable to the gambler
who follows such a system as I am dealing with, but
positively adds to his risks. In the illustrative case of
A playing B, the ruin of B meant that A had gained
all Bs money. But in the case of a gambler playing on
the doubling system at a gaming-table, the ruin of the
bank would be one of the chances against him that such
a gambler would have to take into account. It might
happen when he was far on in a long process of doubling,
and would be almost certain to happen when he had to
some degree entered on such a process. He would then
be certainly a loser on that particular venture. If a
winner on the event actually decided when the bank
broke, he would perhaps receive a share, but
a share only, of the available assets. The rules of the
table may be such that these will always cover the stakes,
and in that case the player, supposing he had won on
the last event decided, would sustain no loss. Should
he have lost on that event, however, which ordinarily
would at least not interfere with the operation of his
system, he is prevented from pursuing the system till he
has recouped his loss. This can never happen in play
between two gamblers on this system. For the very
circumstance that A has lost an event involves of necessity
the possession by B of enough money to continue
the system. Bs stake after winning is always double
the last stake, but after winning the amount just staked
of course he must possess double that amount-since he
has his winnings and also a sum at least equal, which
he must have had when he wagered an equal stake.
But when a player at the gaming-tables loses an event
in one of his ventures, it by no means follows equally
that the bank can continue to double . Losses
against other players may compel the bank to close when
the system player has just lost a tolerably heavy
His system then is defeated, and he sustains a loss
distinct in character from those which his system normally
involves. In other words, the chances against
him are increased; and, on the other hand, the bankers
chance of ruin would be small, even if they had no
advantage in the odds, simply because the sum staked
bears a much smaller proportion to their capital than the
wagers of the individual player bear to his property.

@

Yet the reader must not fall into the mistake of
supposing that because the individual player would have
enormous risks against him, even if the bankers took no
percentage on the chances, the bank would then in the
long run make enormous gains. That would be a paradoxical
result; though at first sight it seems equally
paradoxical to say that while every single player would
be almost certain to be ruined the bank would not
gain in the long run. This, however, is perfectly true.
The fact is, that, among the few who escaped ruin, some
would be enormous gainers. It would be because of
some marvellous runs of luck, and consequent enormous
gains, that they would be saved from ruin; and the
chances would be that some among these would be very
heavy gainers. They would be few; and the action of a
man who gambled heavily on the chance of being one of
these few, would be like that of a man who bought
half a dozen tickets, at a price of each, among millions of
tickets in a lottery, in which were a few prizes of
 each. But though the smallness of the
chance of being one among the few very great gainers at
the gambling-table, makes it absurd for a man to run the
enormous risk of ruin involved in persistent play, yet,
so far as the bankers would be concerned, the great
losses on the few winners would in the long run equalise
the moderate gains on the great majority of their
customers. They would neither gain nor lose a sum
bearing any considerable proportion to their ventures,
and would run some risk, though only a small one,
of being swamped by a long-continued run of bad
luck.

@

But the bankers do not in this way leave matters to
chance. They take a percentage on the chances. The
percentage they take is often not very large in itself,
though it is nearly always larger than it appears, even
when regarded properly as a percentage on the chances.
But what is usually overlooked by those who deal with
this matter, and especially by those who, being gamblers
themselves, to think that gaming houses give them
very fair chances, is that a very small percentage on the
chances may mean, and necessarily does mean, an
enormous percentage of profits.

@

Let us take, as illustrating both the seeming smallness
of the percentage on the chances, and the enormous
probable percentage of profits, the game of,
so far as it can be understood from the accounts
given in the books.
I follow De Morgans rendering
of these confused and imperfect accounts. It seems to
be correct, for his computation of the odds for and
against the player leads to the same result as Poisson
obtained, who knew the game, though he nowhere gives
a description of it.

@

A number of packs is taken, and
the cards are well mixed. Bach common card counts
for the number of spots on it, and the court cards are
each reckoned as ten. A table is divided into two compartments,
one called, the other, and a player
stakes his money in which he pleases. The proprietor
of the bank, who risks against all comers, then lays
down cards in one compartment until the number of
spots exceeds thirty; as soon as this has happened, he
proceeds in the same way with the other compartment.
The number of spots in each compartment is thus
necessarily between and, both inclusive. The compartment
in which the total number of spots is least is
the winning one. Thus, if there are spots on the
cards in the, and on the cards in the,
 wins, and all players who staked upon receive
from the bank sums equal to their stakes. The process
is then repeated. So far, it will be observed, the chances
are equal for the players and for the bankers. It will
also be observed that the arrangement is one which
strongly favours the idea that the bankers have
little interest in the result. For the bank does not back
either colour. The players have all the backing to
themselves. If they choose to stake more in all on the
red than on the black, it becomes the banks interest
that black should win; but it was by the players own
acts that black became for the time the banks colour.
And not only does this suggest to the players the incorrect
idea, that the bank has little real interest in
the game, but it encourages the correct idea, which it is
the manifest interest of the bankers to put very clearly
before the players, that everything is fairly managed.
If the bank chose a colour, some might think that the
cards, however seemingly shuffled, were in reality arranged,
or else were so manipulated as to make the
banks colour win oftener than it should do. But since
the players themselves settle which shall be the banks
colour at each trial, there cannot be suspicion of foul
play of this sort.

@

We now come to the banks advantage on the
chances. The number of spots in the black and red
compartments may be equal. In this case the game is drawn; and the players may
either withdraw, increase, or diminish their stakes, as
they please, for a new game, if the number of spots in
each compartment is any except. But if the number
in each be, then the players are not allowed to withdraw their
stakes. And not only must the stakes remain for a new
game, but, whatever happens on this new trial, the
players will receive nothing. Their stakes are for the
moment impounded . The new game, unless it
chances to give another, will end in favour of
either or Whichever compartment wins, the
players in that compartment save their stakes, but
receive nothing from the bank; the players who have
put their stakes in the other compartment lose them.
De Morgan says here, not quite correctly, should the
bank win it takes the stakes, should the bank lose the
player recovers his stakes. This is incorrect, because
it at least suggests the incorrect idea that the bank may
either win or the stakes go clear; whereas in reality,
except in the improbable event of all the players backing
one colour, the bank is sure to win something, viz
either the stakes in the red or those in the black compartment,
and the only point to be settled is whether
the larger or the smaller of these probably unequal
sums shall pass to the banks exchequer. If the s
gives a second, the stakes still remain impounded,
and another game is played, and no stakes are released
until either or has won. But in the meantime
new stakes may be put down, before the fate of
the impounded stakes has been decided.

@

Thus, whereas, with regard to games decided at the
first trial, the bank has in the long run no interest one
way or the other, the bank has an exceptional interest
in A at once gives the
bank a certainty of winning the least sum staked in
the two compartments, and an equal chance of winning
the larger sum instead. Any gives the bank
the chance that on a new trial a may
be made; and though this chance is small, it tells in the long run and
must be added to the advantage obtained from the
chance of a at once.

@

Now it may seem as though the bank would gain
very little from so small an advantage. A may
occur tolerably often in any long series of trials, but a
 only at long intervals. It is only one
out of ten different, which to the uninitiated
seem all equally likely to occur; so that he supposes
the chance of a to be only one-tenth
of the chance that there will
be a of some sort. But, to begin with, this supposition
is incorrect. Calculation shows that the chance of
a of some sort occurring is, in, or
nearly one in nine. The chance of a 
is not one-tenth of this, or about in, but
 in, or twice as great as the uninitiated
imagine. Thus in very nearly two games in,
instead of one game in, a occurs.
It follows from this, combined with the circumstance
that on the average the bank wins half its stakes only
in the case of one of these,
that the mathematical advantage of the bank is
very nearly one-ninetieth of all the sums deposited.
And in passing it may be noticed as affording good
illustration of the mistakes the uninitiated are apt to
make in such matters, that if instead of the 
the bankers took to themselves the,
then, instead of this percentage per deposit, the percentage
would be only, or per

@

But even an average advantage of per on
each deposit made by the bank is thought by the frequenters
of the table to be very slight. It makes the odds
against the players about to on each trial, and the
difference seems trifling. On considering the probable
results of a years play, however, we find that the
bankers could obtain tremendous interest for a capital
which would make them far safer against ruin than is
thought necessary in any ordinary mercantile business.
I follow De Morgan in taking these numbers, which are
far below what would generally be deposited in 
evenings of play. Now, it can be shown that if the
bankers started with such a sum as they would
be practically safe from all chance of ruin. So that in
 playing nights they would probably make cent. As he justly says, the
preceding results, or either of them, being admitted,
it might be supposed hardly necessary to dwell upon
the ruin which must necessarily result to individual
players against a bank which has so strong a chance of
success against its united antagonists. But, he adds,
so strangely are opinions formed upon this subject,
that it is not uncommon to find persons who think they
are in possession of a specific by which they must infallibly
win. If both the banker and the player staked
on each game -th part of their respective funds,
and the play was to continue till one or other side was
ruined, the bank would have chances to in its
favour against that one player. But if, as more commonly
is the case, the players stake formed a far larger
proportion of his property, these odds would be immensely
increased. If a player staked one-tenth of his
money on each game against the same sum, supposed
to be -th of the banks money, the chances would
be to that he would be ruined if he persisted
long enough. In other words, his chance of escaping
ruin would be the same as that of drawing one single
marked ball out of a bag containing

@

Other games played at the gaming-tables, however
different in character they may be from,
give no better chances to the players. Indeed, some
games give far inferior chances. There is not one of
them at which any system of play can be safe in the
long run. If the system is such that the risk on each
venture is small, then the gains on each venture will
be correspondingly small. Many ventures, therefore,
must be made in order to secure any considerable
gains; and when once the number of ventures is
largely increased, the small risk on each becomes a
large risk, and if the ventures be very numerous
becomes practically a certainty of loss. On the other
hand there are modes of venturing which, if successful
once only, bring in a large profit; but they involve a
larger immediate risk.

@

In point of fact, the supposition that any system
can be devised by which success in games of chance
may be made certain, is as utterly unphilosophical as
faith in the invention of perpetual motion. That the
supposition has been entertained by many who have
passed all their lives in gambling proves only-what
might also be safely inferred from the very fact of their
being gamblers-that they know nothing of the laws
of probability. Many men who have passed all their
lives among machinery believe confidently in the possibility
of perpetual motion. They are familiar with
machinery, but utterly ignorant of mechanics. In like
manner, the life-long gambler is familiar with games
of chance, but utterly ignorant of the laws of chance.

@

It may appear paradoxical to say that chance results
right themselves-nay, that there is an absolute
certainty that in the long run they will occur as often
 as their respective chances warrant,
and at the same time to assert that it is utterly
useless for any gambler to trust to this circumstance.
Yet not only is each statement true, but it is of first-rate
importance in the study of our subject that the
truth of each should be clearly recognised.

@

That the first statement is true, will perhaps not be
questioned. The reasoning on which it is based would
be too abstruse for these pages; but it has been experimentally
verified over and over again. Thus, if a coin
be tossed many thousands of times, and the numbers
of resulting heads and tails be noted, it is found,
not necessarily that these numbers differ from each
other by a very small quantity, but that their difference
is small compared with either. In mathematical phrase,
the two numbers are nearly in a ratio of equality. Again,
if a dice be tossed, say, six million times, then, although
there will not probably have been exactly a million
throws of each face, yet the number of throws of each
face will differ from a million by a quantity very small
indeed compared with the total number of throws. So
certain is this law, that it has been made the means of
determining the real chances of an event, or of ascertaining
facts which had been before unknown. Thus, De
Morgan relates the following story in illustration of
this law. He received it from a distinguished naval
officer, who was once employed to bring home a cargo
of dollars. At the end of the voyage, he says, it
was discovered that one of the boxes which contained
them had been forced; and on making further search
a large bag of dollars was discovered in the possession
of some one on board. The coins in the different
boxes were a mixture of all manner of dates and sovereigns;
and it occurred to the commander, that if the
contents of the boxes were sorted, a comparison of the
proportions of the different sorts in the bag, with those
in the box which had been opened, would afford strong
presumptive evidence one way or the other. This
comparison was accordingly made, and the agreement
between the distribution of the several coins in the bag
and those in the box was such as to leave no doubt as
to the former having formed a part of the latter. If
the bag of stolen dollars had been a small one the
inference would have been unsafe, but the great number
of the dollars corresponded to a great number of chance
trials; and as in such a large series of trials the several
results would be sure to occur in numbers corresponding
to their individual chances, it followed that the number
of coins of the different kinds in the stolen lot would
be proportional, or very nearly so, to the number of
those respective coins in the forced box. Thus, in this
case the thief increased the strength of the evidence
against him by every dollar he added to his ill-gotten
store.

@

We may mention, in passing, an even more curious
application of this law, to no less a question than that
much-talked of but little understood problem, the
squaring of the circle. It can be shown by mathematical
reasoning, that, if a straight rod be so tossed
at random into the air as to fall on a grating of equidistant
parallel bars, the chance of the rod falling
through depends on the length and thickness of the
rod, the distance between the parallel bars, the
proportion in which the circumference of a circle exceeds
the diameter. So that when the rod and grating
have been carefully measured, it is only necessary to
know the proportion just mentioned in order to calculate
the chance of the rod falling through. But also,
if we can learn in some other way the chance of the rod
falling through, we can infer the proportion referred to.
Now the law we are considering teaches us that if we
only toss the rod often enough, the chance of its falling
through will be indicated by the number of times it
actually does fall through, compared with the total
number of trials. Hence we can estimate the proportion
in which the circumference of a circle exceeds the
diameter by merely tossing a rod over a grating several
thousand times, and counting how often it falls through.
The experiment has been tried, and Professor De Morgan
tells us that a very excellent evaluation of the celebrated
proportion was the result.

@

And let it be noticed, in passing, that this inexorable
law-for in its effects it is the most inflexible of all the
laws of probability-shows how fatal it must be to
contend long at any game of pure chance, where the
odds are in favour of our opponent. For instance, let
us assume for a moment that the assertion of the foreign
gaming bankers is true, and that the chances are but
from to per cent. or on each, or may lose considerably;
but where thousands of hundreds are wagered, the bank
will certainly win about their percentage, and the players
will therefore lose to a corresponding extent. This is
inevitable, so only that the play continue long enough.
Now, it is sometimes forgotten that to ensure such gain
to the bank, it is by no means necessary that the players
should come prepared to stake so many hundreds of
pounds. Those who sit down to play may not have a
tithe of the sum necessary-if only wagered once-to
ensure the success of the bank. But every florin the
players bring with them may be, and commonly is,
wagered over and over again. There is repeated gain
and loss, and loss and gain; insomuch that the player
who finally loses a hundred pounds, may have wagered
in the course of the sitting a thousand or even many
thousand pounds. Those fortunate beings who break
the bank from time to time, may even have accomplished
the feat of wagering millions during the process
which ends in the final loss of the few thousands they
may have begun with.

@

Why is it, then, it will be asked, that this inexorable
law is yet not to be trusted? For this reason, simply,
that the mode of its operation is altogether uncertain.
If in a thousand trials there has been a remarkable
preponderance of any particular class of events, it is
not a whit more probable that the preponderance will
be compensated by a corresponding deficiency in the
next thousand trials than that it will be repeated in
that set also. The most probable result of the second
thousand trials is precisely that result which was most
probable for the first thousand-that is, that there will
be no marked preponderance either way. But there
 such a preponderance; and it may lie either
way. It is the same with the next thousand, and the
next, and for every such set. They are in no way
affected by preceding events. In the nature of things,
how can they be? But, the whirligig of time brings
in its revenges in its own way. The balance is restored
just as chance directs. It may be in the next thousand
trials, it may be not before many thousands of trials.
We are utterly unable to guess when or how it will be
brought about.